VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER 
MANCHESTER 


ARTICLE 


THE CHEMICAL BASIS OF 
MORPHOGENESIS 


Author: 

Alan Mathison TURING, 
OBE, FRS 

23 June 1912 — 7 June 1954 


Submitted: 1952 


Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 
14 August 1952, Volume 237, Issue 641 


Abstract 


It is suggested that a system of chemical substances, called morphogens, reacting 
together and diffusing through a tissue, is adequate to account for the main 
phenomena of morphogenesis. Such a system, although it may originally be quite 
homogeneous, may later develop a pattern or structure due to an instability of the 
homogeneous equilibrium, which is triggered off by random disturbances. Such 
reaction-diffusion systems are considered in some detail in the case of an isolated 
ring of cells, a mathematically convenient, though biologically unusual system. The 
investigation is chiefly concerned with the onset of instability. It is found that there 
are six essentially different forms which this may take. In the most interesting 
form stationary waves appear on the ring. It is suggested that this might account, 
	for instance, for the tentacle patterns on Hydra and for whorled leaves. A system 
		of reactions and diffusion on a sphere is also considered. Such a system appears 
		to account for gastrulation. Another reaction system in two dimensions gives rise 
		to patterns reminiscent of dappling. It is also suggested that stationary waves in 
		two dimensions could account for the phenomena of phyllotaxis. The purpose of 
		this paper is to discuss a possible mechanism by which the genes of a zygote! may 
		determine the anatomical structure of the resulting organism. The theory does not 
		make any new hypotheses; it merely suggests that certain well-known physical laws 
		are sufficient to account for many of the facts. The full understanding of the paper 
		requires a good knowledge of mathematics, some biology, and some elementary 
		chemistry. Since readers cannot be expected to be experts in all of these subjects, 
		a number of elementary facts are explained, which can be found in textbooks, but 
		whose omission would make the paper difficult reading. 
		
		
		‘A Zygote is a eukaryotic diploid cell formed by a fertilization event between two haploid cells, 
		called gametes. Haploid cells contain only one version of genes or the DNA (Desoxyribonucleic 
		acid) respectively, i.e. chromosomes, diploid cells therefore contain two chromosome packages, 
		i.e. the DNA of each haploid cell. The newly created Zygote is therefore a combination of the 
		DNA or chromosomes respectively in each gamete, and contains all the genetic information of a 
		new individual organism. 
		
		
		Contents 
		
		
		1; +N 
		
		
		. AMODEL OF THE EMBRYO. MORPHOGENS 
		
		
		MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND REQUIRED 
		
		CHEMICAL REACTIONS 
		
		THE BREAKDOWN OF SYMMETRY AND HOMOGENEITY 
		LEFT-HANDED AND RIGHT-HANDED ORGANISMS 
		REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION IN A RING OF CELLS 
		CONTINUOUS RING OF TISSUE 
		
		
		TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR IN THE RING AFTER A LAPSE 
		OF TIME 
		
		
		8.1. Stationary case of extreme long wavelength. ............. 
		8.2. Oscillatory case of extreme long wavelength ............. 
		8.3. Stationary waves of extreme short wavelength ............ 
		8.4. Stationary waves of finite wavelength ................. 
		8.5. Oscillatory case of a finite wavelength. ................ 
		8.6. Oscillatory case of extreme short wavelength ............. 
		
		
		FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
		
		
		9.1. General formule for the two morphogen case. ............ 
		9.1.1. Stationary waves of extreme long wavelength. ........ 
		
		
		9.1.2. Oscillating case with extreme long wavelength, i.e. synchro- 
		
		
		mined OscillamOns: 26 in! ea ea Qomae eo. aoe pede tae! 2a 
		
		9.1.3. Stationary waves of extreme short wavelength ........ 
		9.1.4. Stationary waves of finite wavelength ............. 
		
		9.2. Consideration of statistical noise disturbance... .......... 
		
		
		9.3. Consideration of extend due to the component which outdistance 
		
		
		OCIS: cet fh dee ik a sed aioe DS ae eek a gore Sepess eo cere Norte Bog ie ed 
		9.4. Consideration of non-linear terms .................-. 
		9.5. Consideration of chemically active morphogens............ 
		
		
		10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
		
		
		Contents 
		
		
		11. RESTATEMENT AND BIOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS 54 
		
		
		12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHERES. GASTRULATION 60 
		13. NON-LINEAR THEORY. USE OF DIGITAL COMPUTERS 65 
		A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 66 
		Daly. A Modeltor Reptation= 4 4° ¢. 44 dee acg 4. eas coe Sk ee Ss 66 
		A.2. Elementary Calculation of the Over-All Mobility. .......... 69 
		B. ILLUSTRATION "EXTREME LONG WAVELENGTH” AN "EXTREME SHORT 
		WAVELENGTH” 73 
		C. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS OF Equation 9.18 74 
		References 76 
		
		
		1. A MODEL OF THE EMBRYO. 
		MORPHOGENS 
		
		
		In this section a mathematical model of the growing embryo will be described. This 
		model will be a simplification and an idealization, and consequently a falsification. 
		It is to be hoped that the features retained for discussion are those of greatest 
		importance in the present state of knowledge. The model takes two slightly different 
		forms. In one of them the cell theory is recognized but the cells are idealized 
			into geometrical points. In the other the matter of the organism is imagined as 
			continuously distributed. The cells are not, however, completely ignored, for various 
			physical and physicochemical characteristics of the matter as a whole are assumed 
			to have values appropriate to the cellular matter. With either of the models one 
			proceeds as with a physical theory and defines an entity called ”the state of the 
			system”. One then describes how that state is to be determined from the state 
			at a moment very shortly before. With either model the description of the state 
			consists of two parts, the mechanical and the chemical. The mechanical part of the 
			state describes the positions, masses, velocities and elastic properties of the cells, 
			and the forces between them. In the continuous form of the theory essentially the 
			same information is given in the form of the stress, velocity, density and elasticity 
			of the matter. The chemical part of the state is given (in the cell form of theory) as 
			the chemical composition of each separate cell; the diffusibility of each substance 
			between each two adjacent cells must also be given. In the continuous form of the 
			theory the concentrations and diffusibilities of each substance have to be given at 
			each point. In determining the changes of state one should take into account 
			
			
			(i) The changes of position and velocity as given by NEWTON’s laws of motion. 
			
			
			(ii) The stresses as given by the elasticities and motions, also taking into account 
			the osmotic pressures as given from the chemical data. 
			
			
			(iii) The chemical reactions. 
			
			
			(iv) The diffusion of the chemical substances. The region in which this diffusion 
			is possible is given from the mechanical data. 
			
			
			This account of the problem omits many features, e.g. electrical properties and 
			the internal structure of the cell. But even so it is a problem of formidable 
			mathematical complexity. One cannot at present hope to make any progress 
			
			
			1. A MODEL OF THE EMBRYO. MORPHOGENS 
			
			
			with the understanding of such systems except in very simplified cases. The 
			interdependence of the chemical and mechanical data adds enormously to the 
			difficulty, and attention will therefore be confined, so far as is possible, to cases 
			where these can be separated. The mathematics of elastic solids is a well developed 
			subject, and has often been applied to biological systems. In this paper it is 
			proposed to give attention rather to cases where the mechanical aspect can be 
			ignored and the chemical aspect is the most significant. These cases promise greater 
			interest, for the characteristic action of the genes themselves is presumably chemical. 
			The systems actually to be considered consist therefore of masses of tissues which 
			are not growing, but within which certain substances are reacting chemically, and 
			through which they are diffusing. These substances will be called morphogens, the 
			word being intended to convey the idea of a form producer. It is not intended to 
			have any very exact meaning, but is simply the kind of substance concerned in this 
			theory. The evocators of WADDINGTON provide a good example of morphogens 
			({11]). These evocators, diffusing into a tissue, somehow persuade it to develop 
				along different lines from those which would have been followed in its absence. The 
				genes themselves may also be considered to be morphogens. But they certainly 
				form rather a special class. They are quite indiffusible. Moreover, it is only by 
					courtesy that genes can be regarded as separate molecules. It would be more 
					accurate (at any rate at mitosis!) to regard them as radicals of the giant molecules 
					known as chromosomes. But presumably these radicals act almost independently, 
					so that it is unlikely that serious errors will arise through regarding the genes as 
					molecules. Hormones may also be regarded as quite typical morphogens. Skin 
					pigments may be regarded as morphogens if desired. But those whose action is to 
					be considered here do not come squarely within any of these categories. 
					
					The function of genes is presumed to be purely catalytic. They catalyze the 
					production of other morphogens, which in turn may only be catalysts. Eventually, 
					presumably, the chain leads to some morphogens whose duties are not purely 
					catalytic. For instance, a substance might break down into a number of smaller 
					molecules, thereby increasing the osmotic pressure in a cell and promoting its 
					growth. The genes might thus be said to influence the anatomical form of the 
					organism by determining the rates of those reactions which they catalyze.” If the 
					rates are assumed to be those determined by the genes, and if a comparison of 
					organisms is not in question, the genes themselves may be eliminated from the 
					discussion. Likewise any other catalysts obtained secondarily through the agency 
					of the genes may equally be ignored, if there is no question of their concentrations 
					
					
					'Mitosis is the whole process of cell division divided into different stages. In general the 
					chromosomes in the cell are duplicated and each of one identical chromosome package diffuses to 
					the corresponding opposite site of the cell, which is then divided through cytokinesis to produce 
					two new daughter cells each with an identical copy of chromosomes. 
					
					2This is a kind of top-down and bottom-up approach often found in self-organizing systems 
					near-the-edge-of chaos or sensible (thermal) equilibrium. This topic is also to be found in a 
					synergetic approach to natural phenomena, see, e.g. [6]. 
					
					
					1. A MODEL OF THE EMBRYO. MORPHOGENS 
					
					
					varying. There may, however, be some other morphogens, of the nature of evocators, 
					which cannot be altogether forgotten, but whose role may nevertheless be subsidiary, 
					from the point of view of the formation of a particular organ. Suppose, for instance, 
					that a ”leg-evocator” morphogen were being produced in a certain region of an 
					embryo, or perhaps diffusing into it, and that an attempt was being made to explain 
					the mechanism by which the leg was formed in the presence of the evocator. It 
					would then be reasonable to take the distribution of the evocator in space and time 
					as given in advance and to consider the chemical reactions set in train by it. That 
					at any rate is the procedure adopted in the few examples considered here. 
					
					
					2. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND 
					REQUIRED 
					
					
					The greater part of this present paper requires only a very moderate knowledge 
					of mathematics. What is chiefly required is an understanding of the solution 
					of linear differential equations with constant coefficients. (This is also what is 
					chiefly required for an understanding of mechanical and electrical oscillations.) The 
					solution of such an equation takes the form of a sum > A-e”, where the quantities 
					A, b may be complex, i.e. of the form a +i, where a and £ are ordinary (real) 
					numbers and i = \/—1. It is of great importance that the physical significance of 
					the various possible solutions of this kind should be appreciated, for instance, that 
					
					
					a) Since the solutions will normally be real, one can also write them in the form 
					
					
					RS A-e™ or NW AZA-e™ (where Z means "real part of”).! 
					b) That if A = A’- e!? and b =a +i, where A’, a, G, and ¢ are real,” then 
					
					
					RA-e* = A’. e™.cos(Bt+¢) , 
					
					
					TA sinusoidal wave is described in general by the equation 
					y(t) = A-sin(wt + b), 
					
					
					where A is the amplitude, w the angular frequency, t the time and b the phase. A (periodic) 
					solution to the differential equations treated in this article is of the form 
					
					
					A , eivt+b 
					
					
					which may be decomposed in ”a real part of’, i.e. Z, and an ”imaginary part of”, ie. 4%, with 
					the help of EULER’s formula to 
					
					
					A. eivtt) — A. cos(wt + b) + isin(wt + b), 
					
					
					where A- cos(wt + b) is @A- civet?. 
					?This statement is mirrored in EULERS fundamental formula that enables a deep connection 
					between the complex exponential function e'? and the trigonometric functions sin(¢) and cos(#) 
					for all numbers € C. This equations reads 
						
						
						e'? = cos(¢) + isin(), 
						
						
						where cos(@) is the real part of this equation and e, a transcendental number, is the base of the 
						natural logarithm or EULER’s number with a value of 2.71828.... 
						
						
						2. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND REQUIRED 
						
						
						because 
						
						
						A-c*@ HA. ctib)t = 4. oe. cibt 
						and if A = A’- e? 
						= A! . ett ; eibt ; ee = A! ; ett ‘ eibttie = A! ‘ ewt ‘ eil(Bt+¢) 
						
						
						— A’.e@. {cos(Bt + 0) + isin(Gt + @)} 
						RA-e* = A'-e™ .cos(Bt+ ¢), 
						
						
						where the exponent law e” - e¥ = e7*¥ was used. 
						Thus each such term represents a sinusoidal oscillation if a = 0, a damped 
						oscillation if a < 0, and an oscillation of ever-increasing amplitude if a > 0. 
						
						
						c) If any one of the numbers 6 has a positive real part, the system in question is 
						unstable. 
						
						
						d) After a sufficiently great lapse of time all the terms A-e™ will be negligible in 
						comparison with those for which b has the greatest real part, but unless this 
						greatest real part is itself zero these dominant terms will eventually either 
						tend to zero or to infinite values. 
						
						
						e) That the indefinite growth mentioned in 2. and 4. will in any physical 
						or biological situation eventually be arrested due to a breakdown of the 
						assumptions under which the solution was valid. Thus, for example, the 
						growth of a colony of bacteria will normally be taken to satisfy the equation 
						ws ay(a > 0), y being the number of organisms at time t, and this has the 
						solution y = A- e*. When, however, the factor e has reached some billions 
						the food supply can no longer be regarded as unlimited and the equation 
						y = A-e™ will no longer apply. 
						
						
						The following relatively elementary result will be needed, but may not be known 
						
						
						to all readers: 
						= 2r irs 0 if O<s<WN 
						Y= exp =<7 — (201) 
						N N, tf is =hors= Nh 
						
						
						The first case can easily be proved when it is noticed that the left-hand side is a 
						geometric progression. 
						In the second case, to make things clear, Equation 2.1 may be written as 
						
						
						N 
						
						
						Yew Pairs) Yew | Zar 
						
						
						Ls ans “i 4s " _ 678 " 
						= exp N exp |i => exp |i => 
						
						
						2. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND REQUIRED 
						
						
						and with EULERs formula as 
						
						
						N N 
						4 4 
						COS =| isin = (2.2) 
						
						
						In Equation 2.2 all the terms are equal to 1 (the real part). In case that s = 0 or 
						s = N, the terms in brackets, [Pats], are either zero or a multiple of 7 and because 
						cos(0) = 1, sin(O) = 0, cos(n7) = 1, and sin(nz) = 0 the result is N. 
						
						The relative degrees of difficulty of the various sections are believed to be as follows. 
						Those who are unable to follow the points made in this section should only attempt 
						chapter 3, chapter 4, chapter 11, chapter 12, and part of chapter 13. Those who 
						can just understand this section should profit also from chapter 7, chapter 8, and 
						chapter 9. The remainder, chapter 5, chapter 10, and chapter 13 will probably only 
						be understood by those definitely trained as mathematicians. 
						
						
						10 
						
						
						3. CHEMICAL REACTIONS 
						
						
						It has been explained in a preceding section that the system to be considered 
						consists of a number of chemical substances (morphogens) diffusing through a 
						mass of tissue of given geometrical form and reacting together within it. What 
						laws are to control the development of this situation? They are quite simple. The 
						diffusion follows the ordinary laws of diffusion, i.e. each morphogen moves from 
						regions of greater to regions of less concentration, at a rate proportional to the 
						gradient of the concentration, and also proportional to the ” diffusibility” of the 
						substance. This is very like the conduction of heat, diffusibility taking the place of 
						conductivity. If it were not for the walls of the cells the diffusibilities would be 
						inversely proportional to the square roots of the molecular weights.1_ The pores 
						of the cell walls put a further handicap on the movement of the larger molecules 
						in addition to that imposed by their inertia, and most of them are not able to 
						pass through the walls at all. The reaction rates will be assumed to obey the 
						"law of mass action”. This states that the rate at which a reaction takes place is 
						proportional to the concentrations of the reacting substances. Thus, for instance, 
						the rate at which silver chloride will be formed and precipitated from a solution of 
						silver nitrate and sodium chloride by the reaction 
						
						
						Ag? + Cl — AgCl 
						
						
						will be proportional to the product of the concentrations of the silver ion Ag? and 
						the chloride ion Cl~. It should be noticed that the equation 
						
						
						AgNO, + NaCl > AgCl+ NaNO3 
						
						
						is not used because it does not correspond to an actual reaction but to the final 
						outcome of a number of reactions. The law of mass action must only be applied 
						to the actual reactions. Very often certain substances appear in the individual 
						reactions of a group, but not in the final outcome. For instance, a reaction A + B 
						may really take the form of two steps A + G > C and C > B+ G. In sucha 
						case the substance G is described as a catalyst, and as thus catalyzing the reaction 
						A — B. (Catalysis according to this plan has been considered in detail by Michaelis 
						& Menten, [9].) The effect of the genes is presumably achieved almost entirely by 
						catalysis. They are certainly not permanently used up in the reactions. 
						
						
						'That the diffusibility is inversely proportional to the square root of the molecular weight .@ 
						stems from the theory called Reptation, see Appendix A. 
						
						
						3. CHEMICAL REACTIONS 
						
						
						Sometimes one can regard the effect of a catalyst as merely altering a reaction rate. 
						Consider, for example, the case mentioned above, but suppose also that A can 
						become detached from G, i.e. that the reaction C > A + G is taken into account. 
						Also suppose that the reactions A + G = C both proceed much faster than 
						C—+B+G. Then the concentrations of A, G, C will be related by the condition 
						that there is equilibrium between the reactions A + G + C and C > A + G, so 
						that (denoting concentrations by square brackets) [A]|G] = k|C] for some constant 
						k. The reaction C > B + G will of course proceed at a rate proportional to [C], 
						i.e. to [A][G]. If the amount of C is always small compared with the amount of 
						G, one can say that the presence of the catalyst and its amount merely alter the 
						mass action constant for the reaction A — B, for the whole proceeds at a rate 
						proportional to [A]. This situation does not, however, hold invariably. It may well 
						happen that nearly all of G takes the combined form C so long as any of A is left. 
						In this case the reaction proceeds at a rate independent of the concentration of A 
						until A is entirely consumed. In either of these cases the rate of the complete group 
						of reactions depends only on the concentrations of the reagents, although usually 
						not according to the law of mass action applied crudely to the chemical equation 
						for the whole group. The same applies in any case, where all reactions of the group 
							with one exception proceed at speeds much greater than that of the exceptional 
							one. In these cases the rate of the reaction is a function of the concentrations of the 
							reagents. More generally again, no such approximation is applicable. One simply 
							has to take all the actual reactions into account. 
							
							According to the cell model then, the number and positions of the cells are given 
							in advance, and so are the rates at which the various morphogens diffuse between 
							the cells. Suppose that there are N cells and M morphogens. The state of the 
							whole system is then given by M-N numbers, the quantities of the morphogens in 
							each of N cells. These numbers change with time, partly because of the reactions, 
							partly because of the diffusion. To determine the part of the rate of change of one 
							of these numbers due to diffusion, at any one moment, one only needs to know the 
							amounts of the same morphogen in the cell and its neighbours, and the diffusion 
							coefficient for that morphogen. To find the rate of change due to chemical reaction 
							one only needs to know the concentrations of all morphogens at that moment in 
							the one cell concerned. 
							
							This description of the system in terms of the concentrations in the various cells is, 
							of course, only an approximation. It would be justified if, for instance, the contents 
							were perfectly stirred. Alternatively, it may often be justified on the understanding 
							that the ”concentration in the cell” is the concentration at a certain representative 
							point, although the idea of ” concentration at a point” clearly itself raises difficulties. 
							The author believes that the approximation is a good one, whatever argument is 
							used to justify it, and it is certainly a convenient one. 
							
							It would be possible to extend much of the theory to the case of organisms immersed 
							in a fluid, considering the diffusion within the fluid as well as from cell to cell. Such 
							problems are not, however, considered here. 
							
							
							1 
							
							
							4. THE BREAKDOWN OF SYMMETRY 
							AND HOMOGENEITY 
							
							
							There appears superficially to be a difficulty confronting this theory of morphogen- 
							esis, or, indeed, almost any other theory of it. An embryo in its spherical blastula 
							stage has spherical symmetry, or if there are any deviations from perfect symmetry, 
							they cannot be regarded as of any particular importance, for the deviations vary 
							greatly from embryo to embryo within a species, though the organisms developed 
							from them are barely distinguishable. One may take it therefore that there is 
							perfect spherical symmetry. But a system which has spherical symmetry, and whose 
							state is changing because of chemical reactions and diffusion, will remain spheri- 
							cally symmetrical for ever. (The same would hold true if the state were changing 
							according to the laws of electricity and magnetism, or of quantum mechanics.) It 
							certainly cannot result in an organism such as a horse, which is not spherically 
							symmetrical. 
							
							There is a fallacy in this argument. It was assumed that the deviations from 
							spherical symmetry in the blastula could be ignored because it makes no particular 
							difference what form of asymmetry there is. It is, however, important that there 
							are some deviations, for the system may reach a state of instability in which these 
							irregularities, or certain components of them, tend to grow. If this happens a 
							new and stable equilibrium is usually reached, with the symmetry entirely gone. 
							The variety of such new equilibria will normally not be so great as the variety 
							of irregularities giving rise to them. In the case, for instance, of the gastrulating 
							sphere, discussed at the end of this paper, the direction of the axis of the gastrula! 
							can vary, but nothing else. 
							
							The situation is very similar to that which arises in connexion with electrical 
							oscillators. It is usually easy to understand how an oscillator keeps going when 
							once it has started, but on a first acquaintance it is not obvious how the oscillation 
							begins. The explanation is that there are random disturbances always present 
							in the circuit. Any disturbance whose frequency is the natural frequency of the 
							oscillator will tend to set it going. The ultimate fate of the system will be a state 
							of oscillation at its appropriate frequency, and with an amplitude (and a wave 
							form) which are also determined by the circuit. The phase of the oscillation alone 
								
								
								'Gastrulation is the stage in the early embryonic development of most animals, during which the 
								blastula (a single-layered hollow sphere of cells), or in mammals the blastocyst is reorganized 
								into a multilayered structure known as the gastrula. 
								
								
								4. THE BREAKDOWN OF SYMMETRY AND HOMOGENEITY 
								
								
								is determined by the disturbance. 
								
								If chemical reactions and diffusion are the only forms of physical change which are 
								taken into account, the argument above can take a slightly different form. For if 
								the system originally has no sort of geometrical symmetry but is a perfectly homo- 
								geneous and possibly irregularly shaped mass of tissue, it will continue indefinitely 
								to be homogeneous. In practice, however, the presence of irregularities, including 
								statistical fluctuations in the numbers of molecules undergoing the various reactions, 
								will, if the system has an appropriate kind of instability, result in this homogeneity 
								disappearing. 
								
								This breakdown of symmetry or homogeneity may be illustrated by the case of a 
								pair of cells originally having the same, or very nearly the same, contents. The 
								system is homogeneous: it is also symmetrical with respect to the operation of 
								interchanging the cells. The contents of either cell will be supposed describable by 
								giving the concentrations X and Y of two morphogens. The chemical reactions will 
								be supposed such that, on balance, the first morphogen (X) is produced at the rate 
								5 X-6Y + 1 and the second (Y) at the rate 6 X - 7 Y + 1. When, however, the 
								strict application of these formulze would involve the concentration of a morphogen 
								in a cell becoming negative, it is understood that it is instead destroyed only at 
								the rate at which it is reaching that cell by diffusion. The first morphogen will be 
								supposed to diffuse at the rate 0.5 for unit difference of concentration between the 
								cells, the second, for the same difference, at the rate 4.5. Now, if both morphogens 
								have unit concentration in both cells, there is equilibrium. There is no resultant 
								passage of either morphogen across the cell walls, since there is no concentration 
								difference, and there is no resultant production (or destruction) of either morphogen 
								in either cell since 5 X- 6 Y + 1 and 6 X- 7 Y 4+ 1 both have the value zero for 
								X = 1, Y = 1. But suppose the values are X; = 1.06, Y; = 1.02 for the first cell 
								and X_ = 0.94, Y2 = 0.98 for the second. Then the two morphogens will be being 
								produced by chemical action at the rates 0.18 and 0.22 respectively in the first cell 
								and destroyed at the same rates in the second. At the same time there is a flow due 
								to diffusion from the first cell to the second at the rate 0.06 for the first morphogen 
								and 0.18 for the second. In sum the effect is a flow from the second cell to the first 
								at the rates 0.12 and 0.04 for the two morphogens respectively. This flow tends to 
								accentuate the already existing differences between the two cells. More generally, if 
								
								
								X, =14+3€, X,=1-3€,Y,;=14+€, Y2=1-€, 
								
								
								at some moment, the four concentrations continue afterwards to be expressible in 
								this form, and € increases at the rate 2€. Thus there is an exponential drift away 
								from the equilibrium condition. It will be appreciated that a drift away from the 
								equilibrium occurs with almost any small displacement from the equilibrium condi- 
								tion, though not normally according to an exact exponential curve. A particular 
								choice was made in the above argument in order to exhibit the drift with only very 
								simple mathematics. 
								
								
								14 
								
								
								4. THE BREAKDOWN OF SYMMETRY AND HOMOGENEITY 
								
								
								Before it can be said to follow that a two-cell system can be unstable, with inho- 
								mogeneity succeeding homogeneity, it is necessary to show that the reaction rate 
								functions postulated really can occur. To specify actual substances, concentrations 
								and temperatures giving rise to these functions would settle the matter finally, but 
								would be difficult and somewhat out of the spirit of the present inquiry. Instead, it 
								is proposed merely to mention imaginary reactions which give rise to the required 
								functions by the law of mass action, if suitable reaction constants are assumed. It 
								will be sufficient to describe 
								
								
								(i) A set of reactions producing the first morphogen at the constant rate 1, and 
								a similar set forming the second morphogen at the same rate. 
								
								
								(ii) A set destroying the second morphogen (Y) at the rate 7 Y. 
								
								
								) 
								(iii) A set converting the first morphogen (X) into the second (Y) at the rate 6 X. 
								(iv) A set producing the first morphogen (X) at the rate 11X. 
								
								(v) A set destroying the first morphogen (X) at the rate 6 Y, so long as any of it 
								is present. 
								
								
								The conditions of (i) can be fulfilled by reactions of the type A + X, B — Y, where 
								A and B are substances continually present in large and invariable concentrations. 
								The conditions of (ii) are satisfied by a reaction of the form Y > D, D being an 
								inert substance and (iii) by the reaction X — Y or X > Y+E. The remaining two 
								sets are rather more difficult. To satisfy the conditions of (iv) one may suppose 
								that X is a catalyst for its own formation from A. The actual reactions could be 
								the formation of an unstable compound U by the reaction A+ X — U, and the 
								subsequent almost instantaneous breakdown U — 2X. To destroy X at a rate 
								proportional to Y as required in (v) one may suppose that a catalyst C' is present 
								in small but constant concentration and immediately combines with X,X+C > V. 
								The modified catalyst reacting with Y, at a rate proportional to Y, restores the 
								catalyst but not the morphogen X, by the reactions V + Y > W, W > C+ H, of 
								which the latter is assumed instantaneous. 
								
								It should be emphasized that the reactions here described are by no means those 
								which are most likely to give rise to instability in nature. The choice of the reactions 
								to be discussed was dictated entirely by the fact that it was desirable that the 
								argument be easy to follow. More plausible reaction systems are described in 
								chapter 10. 
								
								Unstable equilibrium is not, of course, a condition which occurs very naturally. It 
								usually requires some rather artificial interference, such as placing a marble on 
								the top of a dome. Since systems tend to leave unstable equilibria they cannot 
								often be within them. Such equilibria can, however, occur naturally through a 
								stable equilibrium changing into an unstable one. For example, if a rod is hanging 
								from a point a little above its centre of gravity it will be in stable equilibrium. If, 
								
								
								15 
								
								
								4. THE BREAKDOWN OF SYMMETRY AND HOMOGENEITY 
								
								
								however, a mouse climbs up the rod the equilibrium eventually becomes unstable 
								and the rod starts to swing. A chemical analogue of this mouse-and-pendulum 
								system would be that described above with the same diffusibilities but with the 
								two morphogens produced at the rates 
								
								
								(3+1)X-6Y+I1-1 
								and 
								6X-(9+1)Y-I-1. 
								
								
								This system is stable if I < 0 but unstable if I > 0. If I is allowed to increase, 
								corresponding to the mouse running up the pendulum, it will eventually become 
								positive and the equilibrium will collapse. The system which was originally discussed 
								was the case I = 2, and might be supposed to correspond to the mouse somehow 
								reaching the top of the pendulum without disaster, perhaps by falling vertically on 
								TO:1b. 
								
								
								16 
								
								
								9. LEFT-HANDED AND 
								RIGHT-HANDED ORGANISMS 
								
								
								The object of this section is to discuss a certain difficulty which might be thought to 
								show that the morphogen theory of morphogenesis cannot be right. The difficulty 
								is mainly concerned with organisms which have not got bilateral symmetry. The 
								argument, although carried through here without the use of mathematical formule, 
								may be found difficult by non-mathematicians, and these are therefore recommended 
								to ignore it unless they are already troubled by such a difficulty. 
								
								An organism is said to have ”bilateral symmetry” if it is identical with its own 
								reflexion in some plane. This plane of course always has to pass through some part 
								of the organism, in particular through its centre of gravity. For the purpose of this 
								argument it is more general to consider what may be called ” left-right symmetry” . 
								An organism has left-right symmetry if its description in any right-handed set of 
								rectangular Cartesian co-ordinates is identical with its description in some set of 
								left-handed axes. An example of a body with left-right symmetry, but not bilateral 
								symmetry, is a cylinder with the letter P printed on one end, and with the mirror 
								image of a P on the other end, but with the two upright strokes of the two letters 
								not parallel. The distinction may possibly be without a difference so far as the 
								biological world is concerned, but mathematically it should not be ignored. 
								
								If the organisms of a species are sufficiently alike, and the absence of left-right 
								symmetry sufficiently pronounced, it is possible to describe each individual as 
								either right-handed or left-handed without there being difficulty in classifying any 
								particular specimen. In man, for instance, one could take the x-axis in the forward 
								direction, the y-axis at right angles to it in the direction towards the side on which 
								the heart is felt, and the z-axis upwards. The specimen is classed as left-handed or 
								right-handed according as the axes so chosen are left-handed or right-handed. A 
								new classification has of course to be defined for each species. The fact that there 
								exist organisms which do not have left-right symmetry does not in itself cause any 
								difficulty. It has already been explained how various kinds of symmetry can be lost 
								in the development of the embryo, due to the particular disturbances (or ” noise” ) 
								influencing the particular specimen not having that kind of symmetry, taken in 
								conjunction with appropriate kinds of instability. The difficulty lies in the fact that 
								there are species in which the proportions of left-handed and right-handed types 
								are very unequal. It will be as well to describe first an argument which appears to 
								show that this should not happen. The argument is very general, and might be 
								applied to a very wide class of theories of morphogenesis. 
								
								
								5. LEFT-HANDED AND RIGHT-HANDED ORGANISMS 
								
								
								An entity may be described as ” P-symmetrical” if its description in terms of one 
								set of right-handed axes is identical with its description in terms of any other 
								set of right-handed axes with the same origin. Thus, for instance, the totality of 
								positions that a corkscrew would take up when rotated in all possible ways about 
								the origin has P-symmetry. The entity will be said to be ” F-symmetrical” when 
								changes from right-handed axes to lefthanded may also be made. This would apply 
								if the corkscrew were replaced by a bilaterally symmetrical object such as a coal 
									scuttle, or a left-right symmetrical object. In these terms one may say that there 
									are species such that the totality of specimens from that species, together with the 
									rotated specimens, is P-symmetrical, but very far from F-symmetrical. On the 
									other hand, it is reasonable to suppose that 
									
									
									(i) The laws of physics are F-symmetrical. 
									(ii) The initial totality of zygotes for the species is F-symmetrical. 
									
									
									(iii) The statistical distribution of disturbances is F-symmetrical. The individ- 
									ual disturbances of course will in general have neither F-symmetry nor 
									P-symmetry. 
									
									
									It should be noticed that the ideas of P-symmetry and F-symmetry as defined 
									above apply even to so elaborate an entity as ”the laws of physics”. It should also 
									be understood that the laws are to be the laws taken into account in the theory in 
									question rather than some ideal as yet undiscovered laws. 
									
									Now it follows from these assumptions that the statistical distribution of resulting 
									organisms will have F-symmetry, or more strictly that the distribution deduced as 
									the result of working out such a theory will have such symmetry. The distribution 
									of observed mature organisms, however, has no such symmetry In the first place, 
									for instance, men are more often found standing on their feet than their heads. 
										This may be corrected by taking gravity into account in the laws, together with 
										an appropriate change of definition of the two kinds of symmetry. But it will be 
										more convenient if, for the sake of argument, it is imagined that some species has 
										been reared in the absence of gravity, and that the resulting distribution of mature 
										organisms is found to be P-symmetrical but to yield more right-handed specimens 
										than left-handed and so not to have F-symmetry. It remains therefore to explain 
										this absence of F-symmetry. 
										
										Evidently one or other of the assumptions (i) to (iii) must be wrong, i.e. in a 
										correct theory one of them would not apply. In the morphogen theory already 
										described these three assumptions do all apply, and it must therefore be regarded 
										as defective to some extent. The theory may be corrected by taking into account 
										the fact that the morphogens do not always have an equal number of left- and 
										right-handed molecules. According to one’s point of view one may regard this 
										as invalidating either (i), (ii) or even (iii). Simplest perhaps is to say that the 
										totality of zygotes just is not F-symmetrical, and that this could be seen if one 
										
										
										18 
										
										
										5. LEFT-HANDED AND RIGHT-HANDED ORGANISMS 
										
										
										looked at the molecules. This is, however, not very satisfactory from the point of 
										view of this paper, as it would not be consistent with describing states in terms of 
										concentrations only. It would be preferable if it was found possible to find more 
										accurate laws concerning reactions and diffusion. For the purpose of accounting 
										for unequal numbers of left- and right-handed organisms it is unnecessary to do 
											more than show that there are corrections which would not be F-symmetrical when 
											there are leevo- or dextrorotatory morphogens, and which would be large enough 
											to account for the effects observed. It is not very difficult to think of such effects. 
											They do not have to be very large, but must, of course, be larger than the purely 
											statistical effects, such as thermal noise or BROWNian movement. 
											
											There may also be other reasons why the totality of zygotes is not F-symmetrical, 
											e.g. an asymmetry of the chromosomes themselves. If these also produce a 
											sufficiently large effect, so much the better. 
											
											Though these effects may be large compared with the statistical disturbances, 
											they are almost certainly small compared with the ordinary diffusion and reaction 
											effects. This will mean that they only have an appreciable effect during a short 
											period in which the breakdown of left-right symmetry is occurring. Once their 
											existence is admitted, whether on a theoretical or experimental basis, it is probably 
											most convenient to give them a mathematical expression by regarding them as 
											P-symmetrically (but not F-symmetrically) distributed disturbances. However, 
											they will not be considered further in this paper. 
											
											
											19 
											
											
											6. REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION IN A 
											RING OF CELLS 
											
											
											The original reason for considering the breakdown of homogeneity was an apparent 
											difficulty in the diffusion-reaction theory of morphogenesis. Now that the difficulty 
											is resolved it might be supposed that there is no reason for pursuing this aspect of 
											the problem further, and that it would be best to proceed to consider what occurs 
											when the system is very far from homogeneous. A great deal more attention will 
											nevertheless be given to the breakdown of homogeneity. This is largely because 
											the assumption that the system is still nearly homogeneous brings the problem 
											within the range of what is capable of being treated mathematically. Even so many 
											further simplifying assumptions have to be made. Another reason for giving this 
											phase such attention is that it is in a sense the most critical period. That is to 
											say, that if there is any doubt as to how the organism is going to develop it is 
											conceivable that a minute examination of it just after instability has set in might 
											settle the matter, but an examination of it at any earlier time could never do so. 
											
											There is a great variety of geometrical arrangement of cells which might be con- 
											sidered, but one particular type of configuration stands out as being particularly 
											simple in its theory, and also illustrates the general principles very well. This 
											configuration is a ring of similar cells. One may suppose that there are N such 
											cells. It must be admitted that there is no biological example to which the theory 
											of the ring can be immediately applied, though it is not difficult to find ones in 
											which the principles illustrated by the ring apply. 
											
											It will be assumed at first that there are only two morphogens, or rather only two 
											interesting morphogens. There may be others whose concentration does not vary 
											either in space or time, or which can be eliminated from the discussion for one 
											reason or another. These other morphogens may, for instance, be catalysts involved 
											in the reactions between the interesting morphogens. An example of a complete 
											system of reactions is given in chapter 10. Some consideration will also be given 
											in chapter 8 and chapter 9 to the case of three morphogens. The reader should 
											have no difficulty in extending the results to any number of morphogens, but no 
											essentially new features appear when the number is increased beyond three. 
											
											The two morphogens will be called X and Y. These letters will also be used to denote 
											their concentrations. This need not lead to any real confusion. The concentration 
											of X in cell r may be written X,, and Y,, has a similar meaning. It is convenient to 
											regard ”cell N” and cell O” as synonymous, and likewise ”cell 1” and cell” N + 1”. 
											One can then say that for each r satisfying 1 < N < N cell r exchanges material by 
											
											
											6. REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION IN A RING OF CELLS 
											
											
											diffusion with cells r — 1 and r+ 1. The cell-to-cell diffusion constant for X will be 
											called Y,, and that for Y will be called A. This means that for unit concentration 
											difference of X, this morphogen passes at the rate Dy from the cell with the higher 
											concentration to the (neighbouring) cell with the lower concentration. It is also 
											necessary to make assumptions about the rates of chemical reaction. The most 
											general assumption that can be made is that for concentrations X and Y chemical 
											reactions are tending to increase X at the rate f(X,Y) and Y at the rate g(X,Y). 
											When the changes in X and Y due to diffusion are also taken into account the 
											behaviour of the system may be described by the 2 N differential equations 
											
											
											d X,. 
											a f (Xr, Vr) + Bx -(Xr41 —2 Xp + Xp-1) 
											dY (Perot dee ““COLL) 
											: = f (Xr, Ys) TT HN (Yr —2 Ye -+- ¥29)) 
											dt 
											
											
											If, f(h,k) : g(h,k), then an isolated cell has an equilibrium with concentrations 
											X—h, Y =k. The ring system also has an equilibrium, stable or unstable, with 
											each X,, equal to h and each Y,, equal to k. Assuming that the system is not 
											very far from this equilibrium it is convenient to put X, = h+2,, Y, =k+ yp. 
											One may also write ax + by for f(h+2,y+k) and cx + dy for g(hh+2,y +k). 
											Since f(h,k) = g(h,k) =0 no constant terms are required. and since x and y are 
											supposed small the terms in higher powers of x and y will have relatively little effect 
											and one is justified in ignoring them. The four quantities a, b, c, d may be called 
											the ”marginal reaction rates”. Collectively they may be described as the ” marginal 
											reaction rate matrix”. When there are M morphogens this matrix consists of M? 
											numbers. A marginal reaction rate has the dimensions of the reciprocal of a time, 
											like a radioactive decay rate, which is in fact an example of a marginal (nuclear) 
											reaction rate. 
											
											With these assumptions Equation 6.1 can be rewritten as 
											
											
											dx 
											
											
											a = ary + by, + By: (Hr — 2p + Lp_1) 
											: (6.2) 
											dt = ch + Ayr + Dy (Yr4i — 2y, + Yr—1) : 
											
											To solve these equations one introduces new co-ordinates £, 1, €2,...,€v—1 and 
											
											
											To, 1;2,+-+,7N-1 by putting 
											
											
											N-1 
											2719rs ¢ 
											oo x “Ss 
											x Z e P| N | 
											i 2717s 63) 
											= Yoox [P| on 
											
											
											21 
											
											
											6. REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION IN A RING OF CELLS 
											
											
											These relations can also be written as 
											
											
											é, =x Yoo -A]-2. 
											¥en - | 
											
											
											as may be shown by using the equations 
											
											
											N : 
											Qrirs 0, forO<r<N 
											=<” : 6.5 
											Yew | N | ie - r=N ae 
											
											
											forr=0 or 
												s=1 
												
												
												(6.4) 
												
												
												(referred to in chapter 2). Making this substitution one obtains 
												
												
												dg, 1 ad 2rirs 
												ok San[ A 
												
												
												271 2718 
												as. ary + bye + Dx: (exp | | -2 +0 | N l)¢ 
												tg eG) _2mis He. 2718 é 
												= af, + bns + Bx: | exp |-— exp || } & 
												dé. = .9fTS 
												a = bn, + (a 4 P-sin (=) Cs (6.6) 
												Likewise d 
												7 = c&,+ + (d- 4 Wy -sin (= ~)) &. (6.7) 
												
												
												The equations have now ae converted into a quite manageable form! , with the 
												variables separated. There are now two equations concerned with &,, and 7), two 
												concerned with &2, and 72, etc. The equations themselves are also of a well-known 
												standard form, being linear with constant coefficients. Let p, and p’, be the roots 
												
												
												‘A. Lotka, [8], [7] derived similar equations that describe the dynamics of relations between two 
												coexisting or competing reacting substances or species respectively, e.g. two substances in a 
												chemical environment or a predator and its prey in a biological system. The equations are 
												written in the form 
												
												
												dx 
												ae OP 
												dy 
												dt OEY 
												
												
												where x and y are, e.g. the population density of the prey and the predator respectively, a 
												and § are the prey’s parameter, 6 and ¥ are the predator’s parameter. These equations are 
												paired first-order nonlinear differential equations with quasi-periodic solutions. Equation 6.6 
												
												
												22 
												
												
												6. REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION IN A RING OF CELLS 
												
												
												of the equation 
												(p—a +4 %sin? (=): (p-a+4 Asin? (=) =26, (6.8) 
												which multiplied gives 
												p?+p- {4.sin’ (= =) (D+ Bx) — (d+ a)} 
												
												
												+a-{d—dvsin® ()} —4 %sin? (=) - {a-4 Asin? (7) —be=0 
													
													
													with the solutions 
													
													
													pp =—5: {asin? (© =). (H+ Xx) - (d+a)} 
													£5. {4st (= ) (Dy + B) - (d+a)} 
													
													
													—4- [a+ {d—4 Dysin? Ge)t- 4 9x sin? (7) 
														fa-4asu0 ()} 0d] 
														
														
														and, if the term under the square root is > 0, for p, and p), 
														
														
														pp =t+ ft {4sin? (S =): (H+ Xx) - (d+a)} 
														
														
														— [{4—4 Asin? (7) } fa —4 Asin? () } -te] 
														
														
														p= E . { 4sin? (=) -(W+ KX) - (d+a)} 
														
														
														~ [{a—49ysu? (%2)} {a 4anan? (%)} ag] 
														
														
														and Equation 6.7 can be written also in a similar form: 
														
														
														dx 
														Gp = oy + Be 
														dy 
														Ge Ort: 
														
														
														which are paired first-order linear differential equations with periodic solutions. 
														
														
														23 
														
														
														6. REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION IN A RING OF CELLS 
														
														
														(with Zp, > yp, for definiteness), then the solution of Equation 6.6 and Equa- 
														tion 6.7 is of the form 
														
														
														CoA : ePst ads. Bs . ePst 
														(6.9) 
														
														
														/ 
														t 
														NsCs + eP** + Dg - e? 
														
														
														where, however, the coefficients A,, B,, Cs, Ds, are not independent but are 
														restricted to satisfy 
														
														
														ae (v. —~at4Qy-sin? (=)) — oC, 
														a (6.10) 
														BS @ ~at4Qy-sin? (=)) =p): 
														If it should happen that p, = p’, then Equation 6.9 have to be replaced by 
														Gs = (A, Tr B; - t) ' en 
														Ne = (C, T Ds : t) . Pst ep 
														
														
														and Equation 6.10 remains true. Substituting back into Equation 6.3 and replacing 
														the variables x,, y, by X,, Y, (the actual concentrations) the solution can be written 
														as 
														
														
														N 
														D 27 i 
														X,=ht+ ye (A. -ePs! + By. ert) - exp | 
														
														
														ae (6.12) 
														' 27 1 
														Y,=k+ Se (C, Pst + Dy: ert) “exp al 
														s=1 
														
														
														Here A,, B,, Cs, Ds; are still related by Equation 6.10, but otherwise are arbitrary 
														complex numbers; p, and p’, are the roots of Equation 6.8. 
														
														The expression Equation 6.12 gives the general solution of the equations Equation 6.1 
														when one assumes that departures from homogeneity are sufficiently small so that 
														the functions f(X,Y) and g(X,Y) can safely be taken as linear. The form of 
														Equation 6.12 given is not very informative. It will be considerably simplified in 
														chapter 8. Another implicit assumption concerns random disturbing influences. 
														Strictly speaking one should consider such influences to be continuously at work. 
														This would make the mathematical treatment considerably more difficult without 
														substantially altering the conclusions. The assumption which is implicit in the 
														analysis, here and in chapter 8, is that the state of the system at t = 0 is not one of 
														homogeneity, since it has been displaced from such a state by the disturbances; but 
														after t = 0 further disturbances are ignored. In chapter 9 the theory is reconsidered 
														without this latter assumption. 
														
														
														24 
														
														
														7. CONTINUOUS RING OF TISSUE 
														
														
														As an alternative to a ring of separate cells one might prefer to consider a continuous 
														ring of tissue. In this case one can describe the position of a point of the ring by 
														the angle 0 which a radius to the point makes with a fixed reference radius. Let 
														the diffusibilities of the two substances be Z, and HW. These are not quite the 
														same as Zy and W of the last section, since ZY, and Y are in effect referred to a 
														cell diameter as unit of length, whereas Z, and G are referred to a conventional 
														unit, the same unit in which the radius p of the ring is measured. Then 
														
														
														, (NY 
														a= % (55) 
														
														
														Ne? 
														The equations are 
														OX Bax 
														OL =a: (X —h) +6. (Y —k) 7 PP 0b® 
														
														
														(7.1) 
														
														
														ay DH PY 
														
														
														which will be seen to be the limiting case of Equation 6.2. The marginal reaction 
														rates a, b, c, d are, as before, the values at the equilibrium position of 2£, 2£, 22 
														
														
														Ox’? AY? aX? 
														oe The general solution of the equations is 
														X=hA+ S- (A, erst 4 B.. ert) ei 89 
														ee (7.2) 
														Y=k+ sD (C, emt 4 D,. et) eis 
														
														
														where p, and p’, are now roots of 
														
														
														| ee I ee 
														(v-a+ AE). (p-d+ AE) =e (7.3) 
														
														
														7. CONTINUOUS RING OF TISSUE 
														
														
														and 
														
														
														122. 
														Ag ° (o.-a+ ae ) = bC; 
														
														
														toe 
														B,: (v,-a+ oe ) =e 
														
														
														This solution may be justified by considering the limiting case of the solution 
														Equation 6.12. Alternatively, one may observe that the formula proposed is a 
														solution, so that it only remains to prove that it is the most general one. This will 
														follow if values of A,, B,, C,, D, can be found to fit any given initial conditions. 
														It is well known that any function of an angle (such as X) can be expanded as a 
														” FOURIER series” 
														
														
														(7.4) 
														
														
														X(0) = Ss" G,-e'%’ (X(0) being values of KX at t=0), 
														   
														   
														   s=—oo 
														   
														   
														   provided, for instance, that its first derivative is continuous. If also 
														   
														   
														   eh — Ss" H,-e'*’ (Y(0) being values of Y at t=0), 
														   
														   
														   s=—oOo 
														   
														   
														   then the required initial conditions are satisfied provided A, + B, = G, and 
														   C,+ D, = H,. Values of A,, B,, C,, Ds to satisfy these conditions can be found 
														   unless p, = p,. This is an exceptional case and its solution if required may be 
														   found as the limit of the normal case. 
														   
														   
														   26 
														   
														   
														   8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC 
														   BEHAVIOUR IN THE RING AFTER A 
														   LAPSE OF TIME 
														   
														   
														   As the reader was reminded in chapter 2, after a lapse of time the behaviour of 
														   an expression of the form of Equation 6.12 is eventually dominated by the terms 
														   for which the corresponding p, has the largest real part. There may, however, be 
															   several terms for which this real part has the same value, and these terms will 
															   together dominate the situation, the other terms being ignored by comparison. 
															   There will, in fact, normally be either two or four such ” leading” terms. For if p,, 
				 is one of them then py_s, = Ps,, Since 
				 
				 
				 sin? N= 80 = sin? (=) 
				 N N 
				 
				 
				 so that p,, and py-_s, are roots of the same Equation 6.8. If also p,, is complex 
				 then Zp,, = #p’,, and so in all 
				 
				 
				 B Vso = Ry, =  Pn—so = BRYN — 56 . 
				 
				 
				 One need not, however, normally anticipate that any further terms will have to 
				 be included. If p,, and ps, are to have the same real part, then, unless s; = so 
				 or 59 + 5; = N, the quantities a, b, c, d, Fx, H will be restricted to satisfy some 
				 special condition, which they would be unlikely to satisfy by chance. It is possible 
				 to find circumstances in which as many as ten terms have to be included if such 
				 special conditions are satisfied, but these have no particular physical or biological 
				 importance. It is assumed below that none of these chance relations hold. 
				 
				 It has already been seen that it is necessary to distinguish the cases where the 
				 value of p,, for one of the dominant terms is real from those where it is complex. 
				 These may be called respectively the stateonary and the oscillatory cases. 
				 
				 Stationary case. After a sufficient lapse of time X,—h and Y,.—k approach asymp- 
				 
				 
				 8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR ...A LAPSE OF TIME 
				 
				 
				 totically to the forms 
				 
				 
				 27 1S9r 
				 
				 
				 N 
				 
				 
				 = 
				 
				 
				 X,—h= 2 A exp | 
				 
				 
				 ae (8.1) 
				 Y.-k=28 Cy exp = +14] ; 
				 
				 
				 Oscillatory case. After a sufficient lapse of time X,—h and Y,—k approach the 
				 forms 
					 
					 
					 Ss 
					 Xr N= DER Ae exp | 7 iw] 
					 2risor  , 
				 +An-_s, exp |— N —iwt 
				 :2 
				 V-k= 2-88 1C, exp | To +iwt 
				 
				 
				 On| 
				 +CN_s * XD | — a iut| | 
				 
				 
				 The real part of ps, has been represented by I, standing for ” instability”, and in 
				 the oscillatory case its imaginary part is w. By the use of the # operation (real 
				 part of), two terms have in each case been combined in one. 
				 
				 The meaning of these formulze may be conveniently described in terms of waves. In 
				 the stationary case there are stationary waves on the ring having so lobes or crests. 
				 The coefficients A,, and C,, are in a definite ratio given by Equation 6.10, so that 
				 the pattern for one morphogen determines that for the other. With the lapse of 
				 time the waves become more pronounced provided there is genuine instability, i.e. 
				 if I is positive. The wavelength of the waves may be obtained by dividing the 
					 number of lobes into the circumference of the ring. In the oscillatory case the 
					 interpretation is similar, but the waves are now not stationary but travelling. As 
					 well as having a wavelength they have a velocity and a frequency. The frequency is 
					 3,» and the velocity is obtained by multiplying the wavelength by the frequency. 
					 There are two wave trains moving round the ring in opposite directions. 
					 
					 The wavelengths of the patterns on the ring do not depend only on the chemical 
					 data a, b, c, d, 2, H but on the circumference of the ring, since they must be 
					 sub-multiples of the latter. There is a sense, however, in which there is a ” chemical 
					 wavelength” which does not depend on the dimensions of the ring. This may be 
					 described as the limit to which the wavelengths tend when the rings are made 
					 successively larger. Alternatively (at any rate in the case of continuous tissue), it 
					 may be described as the wavelength when the radius is chosen to give the largest 
					 possible instability I. One may picture the situation by supposing that the chemical 
					 wavelength is a true wavelength which is achieved whenever possible, but that on a 
					 ring it is necessary to ”make do” with an approximation which divides exactly into 
					 
					 
					 (8.2) 
					 
					 
					 28 
					 
					 
					 8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR ...A LAPSE OF TIME 
					 
					 
					 the circumference. 
					 
					 Although all the possibilities are covered by the stationary and oscillatory alterna- 
					 tives there are special cases of them which deserve to be treated separately. One 
					 of these occurs when so = 0, and may be described as the ”case of extreme long 
					 wavelength”, though this term may perhaps preferably be reserved to describe 
					 the chemical data when they are such that sg is zero whatever the dimensions of 
					 the ring are. There is also the case of ”extreme short wavelength”. This means 
					 that sin? (#2) is as large as possible, which is achieved by so being either +N , or 
					 5 -(N —1) (see Appendix B). If the remaining possibilities are regarded as forming 
					 the ”case of finite wavelength”, there are six subcases altogether, which will be 
					 discussed below. It will be shown that each of these really can occur, although two 
					 
					 
					 of them require three or more morphogens for their realization. 
					 
					 
					 8.1. Stationary case of extreme long wavelength 
					 
					 
					 This occurs for instance if A = WB = +,b =c=1,a=d. Then p, = 
					 a —sin? (48) +1. This is certainly real and is greatest when s = 0. In this case the 
					 contents of all the cells are the same; there is no resultant flow from cell to cell due 
					 to diffusion, so that each is behaving as if it were isolated. Each is in an unstable 
					 
					 
					 equilibrium, and slips out of it in synchronism with the others. 
					 
					 
					 8.2. Oscillatory case of extreme long wavelength 
					 
					 
					 This occurs, for instance, if A = W = , b= -c=1,a=d. Then p, = 
					 a— sin” (33) +i. This is complex and its real part is greatest when s = 0. As in 
					 case section 8.1 each cell behaves as if it were isolated. The difference from case 
					 section 8.1 is that the departure from the equilibrium is oscillatory. 
					 
					 
					 8.3. Stationary waves of extreme short wavelength 
					 
					 
					 This occurs, for instance, if A = 0, J, =1,d=1,a=I1-1, b= -c= 1. p, is 
					 
					 
					 1 iNA 
					 pf 2-sit(%) + (2-90 (F) +5] 14 
					 
					 
					 TS 
					 
					 
					 and is greatest when sin? (33) is greatest. If N is even, the contents of each cell 
					 are similar to those of the next but one, but distinctly different from those of its 
					 immediate neighbours. If, however, the number of cells is odd, this arrangement is 
					 impossible, and the magnitude of the difference between neighbouring cells varies 
					 round the ring, from zero at one point to a maximum at a point diametrically 
					 opposite. 
					 
					 
					 29 
					 
					 
					 8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR ...A LAPSE OF TIME 
					 
					 
					 Figure 8.1.: Values of & p (instability or growth rate), and | ¥% p| (radian frequency 
					 of oscillation), related to wavelength 27U -3 as in the Equation 8.3 with I = 0. 
					 This is a case of stationary waves with finite wavelength. Full line, @ p; broken 
					 line, —| % p| (zero for U > 0.071); dotted line, Zp’. The full circles on the curve 
					 for & p indicate the values of U, p actually achievable on the finite ring considered 
						 
						 
						 in chapter 10, with s = 0 on the extreme left, s = 5 on the right. 
						 
						 
						 30 
						 
						 
						 8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR ...A LAPSE OF TIME 
						 
						 
						 8.4. Stationary waves of finite wavelength 
						 
						 
						 This is the case which is of greatest interest, and has most biological application. It 
						 occurs, for instance, if a = 1-2, b = 2.5, ce = —1.25, d=14+1.5, R=1, B= s, 
					 
					 
					 Gg Gg 2 . . . 
					 and 4 = A = x) . As before p is the radius of the ring, and N the number of 
					 xX Y 
					 
					 
					 cells in it. If one writes U for 
					 
					 
					 then equation Equation 6.8 can, with these special values, be written as 
					 
					 
					 Sea ile: 1 Le 
					 Di + (5 +3v)-@-p+5-(u-5) =0 (8.3) 
					 This has a solution p = Lif U = S. On the other hand, it will be shown that if U 
					 has any other (positive) value then both roots for p — I have negative real parts. 
					 Their product is positive being 5 : (U — ae so that if they are real they both 
					 have the same sign. Their sum in this case is —} — 2U, which is negative. Their 
					 common sign is therefore negative. If, however, the roots are complex their real 
					 parts are both equal to —4 — 2U, which is negative. 
					 
					 
					 If the radius p of the ring be chosen so that for some integer so, 5 a) 
					 
					 
					 2 
					 (3) - sin? (42), there will be stationary waves with so lobes and a wavelength 
					 which is also equal to the chemical wavelength, for p,, will be equal to I, whereas 
					 every other p, will have a real part smaller than I. If, however, the radius is 
					 
					 
					 ms 
					 
					 
					 N 
					 example) the actual number of lobes will be one of the two integers nearest to the 
					 (non-integral) solutions of this equation, and usually the nearest. Examples can, 
					 however, be constructed where this simple rule does not apply. 
					 
					 Figure 8.1 shows the Equation 8.3 in graphical form. The curved portions of the 
					 graphs are hyperbole. 
					 
					 The two remaining possibilities can only occur with three or more morphogens. 
					 With one morphogen the only possibility is section 8.1. 
					 
					 
					 2 
					 chosen so that (+) - sin? ( ) = 5 cannot hold with an integral s, then (in this 
					 
					 
					 dl 
					 
					 
					 8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR ...A LAPSE OF TIME 
					 
					 
					 8.5. Oscillatory case of a finite wavelength 
					 
					 
					 This means that there are genuine travelling waves. Since the example to be 
					 given involves three morphogens it is not possible to use the formulae of chapter 6. 
					 Instead, one must use the corresponding three morphogen formule. That which 
					 corresponds to Equation 6.8 or Equation 7.3 is most conveniently written as 
					 
					 
					 ay. — p — By, -U a12 a13 
					 21 dag — p — Byg U 93 =0, (8.4) 
					 31 32 a33 — Pp — Dx, U 
					 
					 
					 2 
					 where again U has been written for (4) - sin? (+). (This means essentially 
					 
					 
					 that U = Cae where A is the wavelength.) The four marginal reactivities are 
					 superseded by nine ajj,...,@33 and the three diffusibilities are Fx,, x2, x3. Spe- 
					 cial values leading to travelling waves are 
					 
					 
					 By = 5 Bx, = 5 BR, = 0 
					 ayy = -2? aji20 = 3 a3 = —1 
					 ay, = —2 a2 = f a230 = 0 
					 az1 = 3 a3 = —4 a33 = ~=—O0 
					 
					 
					 and with them Equation 8.4 reduces to 
					 
					 
					 2 
					 pte U + +p-(1+5-U-1)) +U+1=0, (8.5) 
					 
					 
					 If U = 1, the roots are +i and -2. If U is near to I, they are approximately 
					 —1-—U and +44" -(+i-—1), and all have negative real parts. If the greatest 
					 real part is not the value zero, achieved with U = 1, then the value zero must be 
					 reached again at some intermediate value of U. Since P is then pure imaginary 
					 the even terms of Equation 8.5 must vanish, ie. (p?+1)-(U +1) =0. But this 
					 can only happen if p = +i, and the vanishing of the odd terms then shows that 
					 U = 1. Hence zero is the largest real part for any root p of Equation 8.5. The 
					 corresponding p is +i and U is 1. This means that there are travelling waves with 
					 unit (chemical) radian frequency and unit (chemical) velocity. If I is added to ayy, 
					 dg2, and a33, the instability will become I in place of zero. 
					 
					 
					 32 
					 
					 
					 8. TYPES OF ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOUR ...A LAPSE OF TIME 
					 
					 
					 8.6. Oscillatory case of extreme short wavelength 
					 
					 
					 This means that there is metabolic oscillation with neighbouring cells nearly 180° out 
					 of phase. It can be achieved with three morphogens and the following chemical data: 
					 
					 
					 BD = 1 By, = By; =0 
					 a = —l a2 = —l 
					 
					 aj, = 1 ag, = O 
					 
					 a3z1 = O a32 = 1 
					 
					 
					 With these values Equation 8.4 reduces to 
					 
					 
					 pi+p-(U+1)+2p4 
					 
					 
					 Q13 
					 
					 
					 23 
					 
					 
					 33 
					 
					 
					 (8.6) 
					 
					 
					 This may be shown to have all the real parts of its roots negative if U > 0. For if 
					 U = 0 the roots are near to -0.6, —0.2 + 1.3i, and if U be continuously increased 
					 the values of p will alter continuously. If they ever attain values with a positive 
					 real part they must pass through pure imaginary values (or zero). But if p is pure 
					 imaginary, p* + 2p and (p? + 1)-(U +1) must both vanish, which is impossible if 
					 U > 0. As U approaches infinity, however, one of the roots approaches i. Thus 
					 &p = 0 can be approached as closely as desired by large values of U, but not 
					 
					 
					 attained. 
					 
					 
					 33 
					 
					 
					 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF 
					 THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
					 
					 
					 In this chapter some of the finer points concerning the development of wave patterns 
					 are considered. These will be of interest mainly to those who wish to do further 
					 research on the subject, and can well be omitted on a first reading. 
					 
					 
					 9.1. General formule for the two morphogen case 
					 
					 
					 Taking the limiting case of a ring of large radius p (or a filament), one may write! 
					 
					 
					 in Equation 6.12 or 
					 
					 
					 in Equation 7.3 and obtain 
					 (p—a+KU)-(p—d+KHU) = be, (9.1) 
					 
					 
					 which has the solution 
					 
					 
					 ! / i_ Gt _ 7 
					 ee a Bt H ys |(% Au 4S") tL bc. (9.2) 
					 
					 
					 2 2 Z 
					 
					 
					 'The angular wave number k = (2) is the number of wavelengths A that fit into the distance 
					 27x, where x is an arbitrary distance. In the case of a ring with circumference U, and radius p 
					 the angular wave number is calculated according to 
					 
					 Us 2p 
					 (ee Se 
					 p p r 
					 The first term on the r.h.s. represent the quotient of the number of wavelength that correspond 
					 to a specific length, in this case the radius p. In theoretical considerations or calculations 
					 respectively the angular wave number is preferred over the wave number which is simply the 
					 reciprocal of the wavelength. Both numbers therefore differ on the constant factor 27. 
					 
					 
					 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
					 
					 
					 One may put I(U) for the real part of this, representing the instability for waves 
					 of wavelength \ = 27U -2, The dominant waves correspond to the maximum of 
					 1(U). This maximum may either be at U = 0 or U = ov or at a stationary point 
					 on the part of the curve which is hyperbolic (rather than straight). When this last 
					 case occurs the values of p (or I) and U at the maximum are 
					 
					 
					 1 
					 
					 
					 p=U=(d%-aH%-2- RR, Vb) eae 
					 
					 
					 B+ KR 1 
					 U= a d { us x : Vv —be Say PS 
						 VKXK (A.-H) 
						 
						 
						 The conditions which lead to the four cases according to section 8.1, section 8.2, 
	   section 8.3, section 8.4 described in the last chapter are discussed now. 
	   
	   
	   (9.3) 
	   
	   
	   9.1.1. Stationary waves of extreme long wavelength 
	   
	   
	   This occurs if either 
	   
	   
	   i= be =U, 
	   
	   d—a Ge+G 
	   = be = “arid Senes oN 
	   
	   abe af Dy D, 
	   ate ha ee 
	   
	   —be 
	   
	   
	   The condition for instability in either case is that either bc > ad ad ora+d> 0. 
	   
	   
	   9.1.2. Oscillating case with extreme long wavelength, i.e. 
	   synchronized oscillations 
	   
	   
	   This occurs if 
	   
	   
	   d — Al Do De 
	   be< 0 and -2< ae ; 3 
	   Vv —be (ZH ar K) 
	   There is instability, if in addition a+d> 0. 
	   
	   
	   9.1.3. Stationary waves of extreme short wavelength 
	   
	   
	   This occurs if 
	   be 0D SD =, 
	   
	   
	   There is instability if, in addition, a+d> 0. 
	   
	   
	   39 
	   
	   
	   9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
	   
	   
	   9.1.4. Stationary waves of finite wavelength 
	   
	   
	   This occurs if 
	   
	   
	   4-JBR d-a R+HR (9.4) 
	   
	   
	   be >0 and < < : 
	   (KR+HR) ~ JS-be  SRH 
	   
	   
	   and there is instability if also 
	   
	   
	   d |B a [BR 
	   : = . = 2. 9.5 
	   V/—be R VJ-be Ds 2) 
					 
					 
					 It has been assumed that H < FZ > 0. The case where 2, < H, > 0 can be 
					 obtained by interchanging the two morphogens. In the case Z, = H, = 0 there is 
					 no co-operation between the cells whatever. 
					 
					 Some additional formulze will be given for the case of stationary waves of finite 
					 wavelength. The marginal reaction rates may be expressed parametrically in terms 
					 of the diffusibilities, the wavelength, the instability, and two other parameters a 
					 and x. Of these a may be described as the ratio of X—h to Y —k in the waves. 
					 The expressions for the marginal reaction rates in terms of these parameters are 
					 
					 
					 a= amy PAU +X) +H 
					 b= Bera gy (Act MW) -Uo+)-0 - 
					 Or gray (At A) Uv tx)- | 
					 d= Kg ay PRU +x) +1. 
					 
					 
					 and when these are substituted into Equation 9.2 it becomes 
					 
					 
					 1 KR+K B+ is ange 
					 potty BAR ys |(BEB uh) —9ay-w-w" 00 
					 
					 
					 i 
					 
					 
					 Here the factor 27U5 ? is the chemical wavelength and 27U 2 the wavelength of the 
					 FOURIER component under consideration. y must be positive for case section 8.4 
					 to apply. 
					 
					 If s be regarded as a continuous variable one can consider Equation 9.2 or Equa- 
					 tion 9.7 as relating s to p, and we and dp have meaning. The value of dp at the 
					 
					 
					 36 
					 
					 
					 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
					 
					 
					 maximum is of some interest, and will be used below in this section. Its value is 
					 
					 
					 (9.8) 
					 
					 
					 Pp VKXKX &B VAR ee 1 
					 
					 
					 = , ) : —1 1 
					 
					 
					 9.2. Consideration of statistical noise disturbance 
					 
					 
					 In chapter 6, chapter 7, and chapter 8 it was supposed that the disturbances were 
					 not continuously operative, and that the marginal reaction rates did not change 
					 with the passage of time. These assumptions will now be dropped, though it will 
					 be necessary to make some other, less drastic approximations to replace them. The 
					 (statistical) amplitude of the noise” disturbances will be assumed constant in time. 
					 Instead of Equation 6.6, Equation 6.7, one then has 
					 
					 
					 SS = olé +0 + Rll 
					 : (9.9) 
					 a = c+ d'n + Rol(t), 
					 
					 
					 where €, 7 have been written for €,, 7, since s may now be supposed fixed. For the 
					 same reason a — 4 Dy - sin? (45) has been replaced by a’ and d— 4 Dy - sin? (45) by 
					 d'. The noise disturbances may be supposed to constitute white noise, i.e. if (t1, t2) 
					 and (t3,t4) are two non-overlapping intervals then lise R(t) dt and fie R(t) dt are 
					 statistically independent and each is normally distributed eh variances 3 - : — t,) 
					 and 6, - (ta — t3) respectively, 6, being a constant describing the amplitude of the 
					 noise. Likewise for R2(t), the constant G, being replaced by (5. If p and p’ are the 
					 roots of (p—a’)-(p—d’) = bc and p is the greater (both being real), one can make 
					 
					 
					 the substitution 
					 g=)-(u+0) 
					 : oe (9.10) 
					 
					 
					 du p-a Ro(t) 
					 = pu - Ri(t) — ——— 
					 dt (p' — p) +6 ©) (p' — p) 9.11 
					 d p—a’ d 1 TD) 
					 cd GG)-riles). 
					 dt \(p—p)-b) "at \W =») 
					 with a similar equation for v, of which the leading terms are “ = pv. This 
					 
					 
					 indicates that v will be small, or at least small in comparison with u after a lapse 
					 
					 
					 37 
					 
					 
					 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
					 
					 
					 of time. If it is assumed that v = 0 holds, Equation 9.11 may be written as 
					 
					 
					 “ = qu+ L,(t)Ri(t) + Lo(t) Rat), (9.12) 
					 where 
					 2a, 
					 MO Gap 
					 -£-il (9.13) 
					 Pal) = Gy) 
					 
					 
					 q=p+b- L(t). 
					 
					 
					 The solution of this equation is 
					 
					 
					 t t 
					 c= / {I1(w)Ri(w) + Le(w)Ro(w)} - exp | q(z) ae dw. (9.14) 
					 One is, however, not so much interested in such a solution in terms of the statistical 
					 disturbances as in the consequent statistical distribution of values of u, € and 7 
					 at various times after instability has set in. In view of the properties of ” white 
					 noise” assumed above, the values of wu at time t will be distributed according to 
					 the normal error law, with the variance 
					 
					 
					 [. {61 (Li(w))” + Be (L2(w))”} - exp E . fa) ae dw. (9.15) 
					 
					 
					 There are two commonly occurring cases in which one can simplify this expression 
					 considerably without great loss of accuracy. If the system is in a distinctly stable 
					 
					 
					 state, then q(t) which is near to p(t), will be distinctly negative, and exp fi q(z) az| 
					 
					 
					 will be small unless w is near to t. But then L,(w) and L2(w) may be replaced by 
					 L,(t) and L(t) in the integral, and also q(z) may be replaced by q(t). With these 
					 approximations the variance is 
					 
					 
					 {6 (alt)? + Bo (Lalt))?} (9.16) 
					 —2- q(t) 
					 
					 A second case where there is a convenient approximation concerns times when 
					 the system is ot unstable, so that q(t) > 0. For the approximation concerned to 
					 apply, 2 - We q(z) dz must have its maximum at the last moment w(= to) when 
					 q(to) = 0, and it must be the maximum by a considerable margin (e.g. at least 
					 5) over all other local maxima. These conditions would apply for instance if q(z) 
					 were always increasing and had negative values at a sufficiently early time. One 
					 also requires q'(to) (the rate of increase of g at time to) to be reasonably large; it 
					 
					 
					 38 
					 
					 
					 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
					 
					 
					 must at least be so large that over a period of time of length (q’ (to))7? near to 
					 to the changes in L(t) and L(t) are small, and q’(t) itself must not appreciably 
					 alter in this period. Under these circumstances the integrand is negligible when w 
					 is considerably different from to in comparison with its values at that time, and 
					 therefore one may replace L;(w) and L2(w) by Li(to) and Lo(to), and q/(w) by 
					 q'(to). This gives the value 
					 
					 
					 1 
					 Vd (to) 
					 
					 
					 for the variance of u. 
						 
						 The physical significance of this latter approximation is that the disturbances near 
						 the time when the instability is zero are the only ones which have any appreciable 
						 ultimate effect. Those which occur earlier are damped out by the subsequent period 
						 of stability. Those which occur later have a shorter period of instability within 
						 which to develop to greater amplitude. This principle is familiar in radio, and is 
						 fundamental to the theory of the superregenerative receiver. 
						 
						 Naturally one does not often wish to calculate Equation 9.17, but it is valuable as 
						 
						 
						 VT: - {81 (Li(to))” + Bo (Lo(to))”} + exp 2. / q(z) ae , (9.17) 
						 
						 
						 justifying a common-sense point of view of the matter. The factor exp i, q(z) dz| 
						 
						 
						 is essentially the integrated instability and describes the extent to which one would 
						 expect disturbances of appropriate wavelength to grow between times tg, and ft. 
						 
						 
						 1) 
						 
						 
						 Taking the terms in (1, 32 into consideration separately, the factor /73;-(q'(to)) 
						 (L1(to))” indicates that the disturbances on the first morphogen should be regarded 
						 as lasting for a time 
						 1 
						 qu (to) 
						 
						 
						 The dimensionless quantities b- Li (to), b- Le(to) will not usually be sufficiently 
						 large or small to justify their detailed calculation. 
						 
						 
						 “(be Lia)? 
						 
						 
						 9.3. Consideration of extend due to the component 
						 which outdistance others 
						 
						 
						 The extent to which the component, for which p, is greatest, may be expected to 
						 outdistance the others will now be considered in case section 8.4. The greatest of the 
						 ps will be called p,,. The two closest competitors to s9 will be so — 1 and sy +1; it is 
						 required to determine how close the competition is. If the variation in the chemical 
						 data is sufficiently small it may be assumed that, although the exponents p,, — 1, 
						 Psp: Pso+1 May themselves vary appreciably in time, the differences p,, — ps,—-1 and 
						 Psp — Pso+1 are constant. It certainly can happen that one of these differences is 
						 zero or nearly zero, and there is then ”neck and neck” competition. The weakest 
						 
						 
						 39 
						 
						 
						 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
						 
						 
						 competition occurs when p,,-1 = Pso+1- In this case 
						 1 
						 Ps — Pso—1 = Pso — Psot = — 5 (Deptt 2g Dep)? 
						 
						 
						 But if so is reasonably large p,,41 — 2Ps, + Ps >—1 Can be set equal to (=) a At 
						 S=So 
						 may be concluded that the rate at which the most quickly growing component grows 
						 
						 
						 cannot exceed the rate for its closest competitor by more than about 5 : €3) : 
						 S=so 
						 
						 
						 The Equation 9.8, by which dp can be estimated, may be regarded as the product 
						 
						 
						 of two factors. The dimensionless factor never exceeds 4. The factor 4 / a? Y may 
						 
						 
						 be described in very rough terms as ”the reciprocal of the time for the morphogens 
						 to diffuse a length equal to a radius”. In equally rough terms one may say that a 
						 time of this order of magnitude is required for the most quickly growing component 
						 to get a lead, amounting to a factor whose logarithm is of the order of unity, over 
						 its closest competitors, in the favourable case where ps -1 = Pso+1- 
						 
						 
						 9.4. Consideration of non-linear terms 
						 
						 
						 Very little has yet been said about the effect of considering non-linear reaction 
						 rate functions when far from homogeneity. Any treatment so systematic as that 
						 given for the linear case seems to be out of the question. It is possible, however, to 
						 reach some qualitative conclusions about the effects of non-linear terms. Suppose 
						 that z,, is the amplitude of the FOURIER component which is most unstable (on a 
						 basis of the linear terms), and which may be supposed to have wavelength A. The 
						 non-linear terms will cause components with wavelengths 5A, 5A, 5A, ... to appear 
						 as well as a space-independent component. If only quadratic terms are taken into 
						 account and if these are somewhat small, then the component of wavelength 5A 
						 and the space-independent component will be the strongest. Suppose these have 
						 amplitudes z;, and z. The state of the system is thus being described by the 
						 numbers Zo, 21, 22. In the absence of non-linear terms they would satisfy equations 
						 
						 
						 dzo 
						 
						 —_ = os 
						 
						 oF Poo 
						 dz, 
						 
						 ——— SS wh 
						 
						 dt P11 
						 dz 
						 
						 ————— z . 
						 dt P222 
						 
						 
						 and if there is slight instability p; would be a small positive number, but pp and po 
						 distinctly negative. The effect of the non-linear terms is to replace these equations 
						 
						 
						 40 
						 
						 
						 9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
						 
						 
						 by ones of the form? 
						 
						 
						 dz 
						 
						 a = pozo + Az + Bzj 
						 
						 d 
						 
						 a = 91% + C292 + Dzy2y (9.18) 
						 dz 
						 
						 a = p222 + Ez? + F229 . 
						 
						 
						 As a first approximation one may put to = ee = 0 and ignore z/ and higher 
						 powers; 29 and z; are then found to be proportional to z?, and the equation for 2 
						 
						 
						 can be written as 
						 dz 
						 
						 
						 dt 
						 The sign of & in this differential equation is of great importance. If it is positive, 
						 then the effect of the term kz? is to arrest the exponential growth of z, at the 
						 value Je . The ”instability” is then very confined in its effect, for the waves can 
						 only reach a finite amplitude, and this amplitude tends to zero as the instability 
						 (p1) tends to zero. If, however, k is negative the growth becomes something even 
						 faster than exponential, and, if the equation da = pz, — kz? held universally, it 
						 would result in the amplitude becoming infinite in a finite time. This phenomenon 
						 may be called ” catastrophic instability” .* In the case of two-dimensional systems 
						 catastrophic instability is almost universal, and the corresponding equation takes 
						 
						 
						 the form ta = p,2, + kz?. Naturally enough in the case of catastrophic instability 
						 
						 
						 = 3 
						 = Po~1 — kzy : 
						 
						 
						 ?These equations, when 2 = 2, 21 = y, Z2 = Z, are similar to those derived by Lotka mentioned 
						 earlier, see page 22. The equations then read 
						 
						 
						 d 
						 7 = pox + Ay* + Bz? 
						 d 
						 7 =piy t+ Cyz + Dry 
						 d 
						 = = poz + Ey? 4+ Faz, 
						 
						 
						 which are a set of coupled, inhomogeneous nonlinear first-order differential equations (see 
						 Appendix C). 
						 
						 3Catastrophic instability is an immanent part of the theory called Bifurcation theory. It is the 
						 mathematical study of changes in the qualitative or topological structure of a given family of 
						 curves, e.g. in R!, R? or R®, such as the integral curves of a family of vector fields, and the 
						 solutions of a family of differential equations. Most commonly applied to the mathematical study 
						 of dynamical systems, a bifurcation occurs when a small smooth change made to the parameter 
						 values (the bifurcation parameters) of a system causes a sudden ” qualitative” or topological 
						 change in its behavior. Bifurcations occur in both continuous systems (described by ordinary, 
																								delay or partial differential equations) and discrete systems (described by maps). Furthermore 
																								bifurcation diagrams are an important tool to illustrate the dependency of the values visited or 
																								approached asymptotically and the within the system inherent bifurcation parameters. Also of 
																								great importance in this aspect are the FEIGENBAUM constants 6 and a. 
																								
																								
																								Al 
																								
																								
																								9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
																								
																								
																								the amplitude does not really reach infinity, but when it is sufficiently large some 
																								effect previously ignored becomes large enough to halt the growth. 
																								
																								
																								9.5. Consideration of chemically active morphogens 
																								
																								
																								Case section 8.1 as described in chapter 8 represents a most extremely featureless 
																								form of pattern development. This may be remedied quite simply by making less 
																									drastic simplifying assumptions, so that a less gross account of the pattern can 
																									be given by the theory. It was assumed in chapter 9 that only the most unstable 
																									FOURIER components would contribute appreciably to the pattern, though it was 
																									seen above (section 9.3 of this section) that (in case section 8.4) this will only apply 
																									if the period of time involved is adequate to permit the morphogens, supposed 
																										for this purpose to be chemically inactive, to diffuse over the whole ring or organ 
																											concerned. The same may be shown to apply for case section 8.1. If this assumption 
																											is dropped a much more interesting form of pattern can be accounted for. To do this 
																											it is necessary to consider not merely the components with U = 0 but some others 
																											with small positive values of U. One may assume the form At— BU for p. Linearity 
																											in U is assumed because only small values of U are concerned, and the term At is 
																											included to represent the steady increase in instability. By measuring time from 
																											the moment of zero instability the necessity for a constant term is avoided. The 
																											formula Equation 9.17 may be applied to estimate the statistical distribution of 
																												
																												
																												the amplitudes of the components. Only the factor exp E : nis q(z) az| will depend 
																												
																												
																												very much on U, and taking q(t) = p(t) = At — BU, to must be BU/A and the 
																												factor is 
																												
																												
																												The term in U? can be ignored if At? is fairly large, for then either B?U?/A? is small 
																												or the factor is e~24*. But At? certainly is large if the factor e“”, applying when 
																												U =0, is large. With this approximation the variance takes the form C'- en aU 
																												with only the two parameters C’, k to distinguish the pattern populations. By 
																												choosing appropriate units of concentration and length these pattern populations 
																												may all be reduced to a standard one, e.g. with C = k = 1. Random members of 
																												this population may be produced by considering any one of the type section 8.1- 
																												systems to which the approximations used above apply. They are also produced, 
																												but with only a very small amplitude scale, if a homogeneous one-morphogen 
																												system undergoes random disturbances without diffusion for a period, and then 
																												diffusion without disturbance. This process is very convenient for computation, and 
																												can also be applied to two dimensions. Figure 9.1 shows such a pattern, obtained 
																												in a few hours by a manual computation. 
																												
																												To be more definite, a set of numbers u,., was chosen, each being +1, and taking the 
																												two values with equal probability. A function f(x,y) is related to these numbers 
																												
																												
																												42 
																												
																												
																												9. FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE MATHEMATICS OF THE RING 
																												
																												
																												Figure 9.1.: An example of a” dappled” pattern as resulting from a type section 8.1 
																												morphogen system. A marker of unit length is shown. See text, chapter 9, 
																												chapter 11. 
																												
																												
																												by the formula 
																												
																												
																												i(z,y) = > tes exp -5 -((@ — hr)? + (y— hs) 
																												
																												
																												In the actual computation a somewhat crude approximation to the function 
																												
																												
																												was used and h was about 0.7. In the figure the set of points where f(x,y) is 
																												positive is shown black. The outlines of the black patches are somewhat less 
																												irregular than they should be due to an inadequacy in the computation procedure. 
																												
																												
																												43 
																												
																												
																												10. ANUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																												
																												
																												The numerous approximations and assumptions that have been made in the forego- 
																												ing analysis may be rather confusing to many readers. In the present section it is 
																												proposed to consider in detail a single example of the case of most interest, namely 
																												case section 8.4. This will be made as specific as possible. It is unfortunately not 
																												possible to specify actual chemical reactions with the required properties, but it 
																												is thought that the reaction rates associated with the imagined reactions are not 
																												unreasonable. 
																												
																												The detail to be specified includes 
																												
																												
																												iL 
																												2 
																												3. 
																												
																												
																												The number and dimensions of the cells of the ring. 
																												The diffusibilities of the morphogens. 
																												
																												
																												The reactions concerned. 
																												
																												
																												. The rates at which the reactions occur. 
																												. Information about random disturbances. 
																												
																												
																												. Information about the distribution, in space and time, of those morphogens 
																												
																												
																												which are of the nature of evocators. 
																												
																												
																												These will be taken in order. 
																												
																												
																												(i) 
																												
																												
																												It will be assumed that there are twenty cells in the ring, and that they have 
																												a diameter of 0.1mm each. These cells are certainly on the large rather than 
																												the small side, but by no means impossibly so. The number of cells in the 
																												ring has been chosen rather small in order that it should not be necessary to 
																												make the approximation of continuous tissue. 
																												
																												
																												Two morphogens are considered. They will be called X and Y, and the same 
																												letters will be used for their concentrations. This will not lead to any real 
																												confusion. The diffusion constant for X will be assumed to be 5 x 10~$ cm? s7! 
																												and that for Y to be 2.5 x 10-$cm?s~!. With cells of diameter 0.01 mm 
																												this means that X flows between neighbouring cells at the rate 5- 107+ of 
																												
																												
																												the difference of X-content of the two cells per second. In other words, if 
																												
																												
																												10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																												
																												
																												there is nothing altering the concentrations but diffusion the difference of 
																												concentrations suffers an exponential decay with time constant 1000s, or 
																												"half-period” of 700s. These times are doubled for Y. 
																												
																												If the cell membrane is regarded as the only obstacle to diffusion the perme- 
																												ability of the membranes to the morphogen is 5 x 10-°cms™! or 0.018cmh7!?. 
																												Values as large as 0.1 cmh™! have been observed ([3], figure 28). 
																												
																												
																												(iii) The reactions are the most important part of the assumptions. Four sub- 
																												stances A, X, Y, B are involved; these are isomeric, i.e. the molecules of the 
																												four substances are all rearrangements of the same atoms. Substances C, C’, 
													W will also be concerned. The thermodynamics of the problem will not be 
													discussed except to say that it is contemplated that of the substances A, X, 
													Y, B, the one with the greatest free energy is A, and that with the least is 
													B. Energy for the whole process is obtained by the degradation of A into B. 
													The substance C' is in effect a catalyst for the reaction Y > X, and may also 
													be regarded as an evocator, the system being unstable if there is a sufficient 
													concentration of C. 
													
													The reactions postulated are 
													
													
													Y+X>W 
													W+A—>2Y+8 instantly 
													2X > W 
													AX 
													YB 
													Y+C—>C" instantly 
													C'>X+4+C. 
													
													
													(iv) For the purpose of stating the reaction rates, special units will be introduced 
													(for the purpose of this section only). They will be based on a period of 1000s 
													as units of time, and 107'! molem™? as concentration unit!. There will be 
													little occasion to use any but these special units (s.u.). The concentration 
													of A will be assumed to have the large value of 1000 s.u. and the catalyst 
													C, together with its combined form C’ the concentration 107° - (1 + 7) s.u., 
																																		the dimensionless quantity y being often supposed somewhat small, though 
																																		values over as large a range as from-0.5 to 0.5 may be considered. The rates 
																																		assumed will be With the values assumed for A and C” the net effect of these 
																																		reactions is to convert X into Y at the rate # - [50XY +7 M552 (14 7) ] at 
																																		the same time producing X at the constant rate is and destroying Y at the 
																																		rate Y /16. If, however, the concentration of Y is zero and the rate of increase 
																																		
																																		
																																		‘A somewhat larger value of concentration unit (e.g. 10~? molem~°) is probably more suitable. 
																																		The choice of unit only affects the calculations through the amplitude of the random disturbances. 
																																		
																																		
																																		45 
																																		
																																		
																																		10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																																		
																																		
																																		SS 
																																		
																																		
																																		Y+X > W at the rate 2 YX 
																																		2X +> W at the rate a xX? 
																																		A-7> Xx at the rate = x 10-3A 
																																		C' + X+C at the rate 8 x 101°C’ 
																																		Y —> B at the rate a Y 
																																		
																																		
																																		of Y required by these formule is negative, the rate of conversion of Y into X 
																																		is reduced sufficiently to permit Y to remain zero. 
																																		In the special units Dy = x, Dye . 
																																		
																																		
																																		Statistical theory describes in detail what irregularities arise from the molecu- 
																																		lar nature of matter. In a period in which, on the average, one should expect 
																																		a reaction to occur between n pairs (or other combinations) of molecules, the 
																																		actual number will differ from the mean by an amount whose mean square is 
																																		also n, and is distributed according to the normal error law. Applying this 
																																		to a reaction proceeding at a rate F'(s.u.) and taking the volume of the cell 
																																		as 10-8 cm? (assuming some elongation tangentially to the ring) it will be 
																																		found that the root mean square irregularity of the quantity reacting in a 
																																		period 7 of time (s.u.) is 0.004: /VF-r. 
																																		
																																		
																																		46 
																																		
																																		
																																		10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																																		
																																		
																																		first spicemen 
																																		
																																		
																																		ec  -c—--[’  ————_———————\ 
																																		
																																		
																																		four-lobed 
																																		incipient pattern final pattern second slow equilibrium 
																																		a specimen: cooking” : 
																																		a incipient incipient 
																																		number X Y X Y Y Y X Y 
																																		0 1.130 0.929 0.741 1.463 0.834 1.057 Lay 0.000 
																																		t 1423 0.940 0.761 1.469 0.833 0.903 1.685 0.000 
																																		2 1.154 0.885 0.954 1.255 0.766 0.813 1.445 2.500 
																																		3 1.215 0.810 1.711 0.000 0.836 0.882 0.445 2.500 
																																		4 1.249 0.753 1.707 0.000 0.930 1.088 1.685 0.000 
																																		5 1.158 0.873 0.875 1.385 0.898 1222 1.747 0.000 
																																		6 1.074 1.003 0.700 1:622 0.770 1.173 1.685 0.000 
																																		. 1.078 1.000 0.699 1.615 0.740 0.956 0.445 2.500 
																																		8 1.148 0.896 0.885 1.382 0.846 0.775 0.445 2.500 
																																		9 1.231 0.775 1.704 0.000 0.937 0.775 1.685 0.000 
																																		10 1.204 0.820 1.708 0.000 0.986 0.969 1.747 0.000 
																																		‘lcd 1.149 0.907 0.944 1.273 1.019 1.170 1.685 0.000 
																																		12 1.156 0.886 0.766 1.451 0.899 1.203 0.445 2.500 
																																		13 1.170 0.854 0.744 1.442 0.431 1.048 0.445 2.500 
																																		14 1.131 0.904 0.756 1.478 0.485 0.868 1.685 0.000 
																																		15 1.090 0.976 0.935 1.308 0.919 0.813 1.747 0.000 
																																		16 1.109 0.957 LL 0.000 1.035 0.910 1.685 0.000 
																																		17 1.201 0.820 1.706 0.000 1.003 1.050 0.445 2.500 
																																		18 1.306 0.675 0.927 1.309 0.899 1.175 0.445 2.500 
																																		19 LUT 0.811 0.746 1.487 0.820 1.181 1.685 0.000 
																																		
																																		
																																		Table 10.1.: Numerical example: Some stationary-wave patterns computed for two morphogens X, Y 
																																		
																																		
																																		AT 
																																		
																																		
																																		10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																																		
																																		
																																		The diffusion of a morphogen from a cell to a neighbour may be treated as 
																																		if the passage of a molecule from one cell to another were a monomolecular 
																																			reaction; a molecule must be imagined to change its form slightly as it passes 
																																			the cell wall. If the diffusion constant for a wall is Y,, and quantities M;, Me 
																																			of the relevant morphogen lie on the two sides of it, the root-mean-square 
																																			irregularity in the amount passing the wall in a period T is 
																																			
																																			
																																			0.004 - \/(M; +M2)- Dy 
																																			
																																			
																																			These two sources of irregularity are the most significant of those which 
																																			arise from truly statistical cause, and are the only ones which are taken into 
																																			account in the calculations whose results are given below. There may also be 
																																			disturbances due to the presence of neighbouring anatomical structures, and 
																																			other similar causes. These are of great importance, but of too great variety 
																																			and complexity to be suitable for consideration here. 
																																			
																																			
																																			The only morphogen which is being treated as an evocator is C’. Changes in 
																																			the concentration of A might have similar effects, but the change would have 
																																			to be rather great. It is preferable to assume that A is a ”fuel substance” 
																																			(e.g. glucose) whose concentration does not change. The concentration of C, 
																																		together with its combined form C’, will be supposed the same in all cells, but 
																																		it changes with the passage of time. Two different varieties of the problem 
																																		will be considered, with slightly different assumptions. 
																																		
																																		
																																		The results are shown in Table 10.1. There are eight columns, each of which gives 
																																		the concentration of a morphogen in each of the twenty cells; the circumstances 
																																		to which these concentrations refer differ from column to column. The first five 
																																		columns all refer to the same ” variety” of the imaginary organism, but there are 
																																		two specimens shown. The specimens differ merely in the chance factors which 
																																		were involved. With this variety the value of y was allowed to increase at the rate 
																																		of 2~" s.u. from the value —F to +i. At this point a pattern had definitely begun 
																																		to appear, and was recorded. The parameter y was then allowed to decrease at the 
																																		same rate to zero and then remained there until there was no more appreciable 
																																		change. 
																																		
																																		
																																		48 
																																		
																																		
																																		10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																																		
																																		
																																		012345 6 7 8 9 10 Il 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 
																																		
																																		
																																		Figure 10.1.: Concentrations of Y in the development of the first specimen (taken 
																																		from Table 10.1). — —- —-—— original homogeneous equilibrium; ///// incipient 
																																		pattern; final equilibrium 
																																		
																																		
																																		The pattern was then recorded again. The concentrations of Y in these two 
																																		recordings are shown in Figure 10.1 as well as in Table 10.1. For the second 
																																		specimen only one column of figures is given, viz. those for the Y morphogen in 
																																		the incipient pattern. At this stage the X values are closely related to the Y values, 
													as may be seen from the first specimen (or from theory). The final values can be 
													made almost indistinguishable from those for the first specimen by renumbering 
													the cells and have therefore not been given. These two specimens may be said to 
													belong to the ” variety with quick cooking”, because the instability is allowed to 
													increase so quickly that the pattern appears relatively soon. The effect of this haste 
													might be regarded as rather unsatisfactory, as the incipient pattern is very irregular. 
													In both specimens the four-lobed component is present in considerable strength 
													in the incipient pattern. It ” beats” with the three-lobed component producing 
													considerable irregularity. The relative magnitudes of the three- and four-lobed 
													components depend on chance and vary from specimen to specimen. The four-lobed 
													
													
													49 
													
													
													10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
													
													
													component may often be the stronger, and may occasionally be so strong that the 
													final pattern is four-lobed. How often this happens is not known, but the pattern, 
													when it occurs, is shown in the last two columns of Table 10.1. In this case the 
													disturbances were supposed to be removed for some time before recording, so as to 
													give a perfectly regular pattern. 
													The remaining column refers to a second variety, one with ”slow cooking”. In this 
													the value of y was allowed to increase only at the rate 107°. Its initial value was 
													-0.010, but is of no significance. The final value was 0.003. With this pattern, when 
													shown graphically, the irregularities are definitely perceptible, but are altogether 
													overshadowed by the three-lobed component. The possibility of the ultimate 
													pattern being four-lobed is not to be taken seriously with this variety. 
													The set of reactions chosen is such that the instability becomes ” catastrophic 
													when the second-order terms are taken into account, i.e. the growth of the waves 
													tends to make the whole system more unstable than ever. This effect is finally 
													halted when (in some cells) the concentration of Y has become zero. The constant 
													conversion of Y into X through the agency of the catalyst C’ can then no longer 
													continue in these cells, and the continued growth of the amplitude of the waves is 
													arrested. When y = 0 there is of course an equilibrium with X = Y = 1 in all cells, 
													which is very slightly stable. There are, however, also other stable equilibria with 
													y = 0, two of which are shown in the table. These final equilibria may, with some 
													trouble but little difficulty, be verified to be solutions of Equation 6.1 with 
													
													dX dyY 
													
													
													ce 
													
													
													” 
													
													
													and 
													
													
													32- f(X, Y) =57 -—50XY-7Y’ 
													32 -9(X, Y) = 50 XY +7Y7 =2Y —55. 
													
													
													The morphogen concentrations recorded at the earlier times connect more directly 
													with the theory given in chapter 6, chapter 7, chapter 8, and chapter 9. The 
													amplitude of the waves was then still sufficiently small for the approximation of 
													linearity to be still appropriate, and consequently the ” catastrophic” growth had 
													not yet set in. 
													
													The functions f(X,Y) and g(X, Y) of chapter 6 depend also on ¥ and are 
													
													
													1 
													f(X,Y) = a5 [—7 X? —50 XY +57 + 557] 
													
													1 
													9 (X,Y) = 35 + [7X? +50X¥ —2Y —55 — 55] - 
													
													
													In applying the theory it will be as well to consider principally the behaviour of 
													the system when 7 remains permanently zero. Then for equilibrium f(X,Y) = 
													
													
													50 
													
													
													10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
													
													
													g(X, Y) = 0 which means that X = Y = 1, ie. h =k = 1. One also finds the 
													following values for various quantities mentioned in chapter 6, chapter 7, chapter 8, 
													and chapter 9 
													
													
													a=-—2 
													
													b = —1.5625 
													
													c=2 
													
													d = 1.500 
													
													8 = 3.333 
													
													I=0 
													
													a = 0.625 
													
													y = 0.500 
													d-—a 
													avin 1.980 
													
													BAM _ 949) 
																												
																												
																												po = —0.25 + 0.251 
																												
																												
																												po = —0.0648 
																												p3 = —0.0034 
																												pa = —0.0118 
																												
																												
																												(The relation between p and U for these chemical data, and the values p,, can be 
																												seen in Figure 8.1, the values being so related as to make the curves apply to this 
																												example as well as that in chapter 8.) The value s = 3.333 leads one to expect 
																												a three-lobed pattern as the commonest, and this is confirmed by the values py. 
																												The four-lobed pattern is evidently the closest competitor. The closeness of the 
																												competition may be judged from the difference p3 — py = 0.0084, which suggests 
																												that the three-lobed component takes about 120 s.u. or about 33h to gain an 
																												advantage of a neper (i.e. about 2.7:1) over the four-lobed one. However, the 
																												fact that + is different from 0 and is changing invalidates this calculation to some 
																												extent. 
																												
																												The figures in Table 10.1 were mainly obtained with the aid of the Manchester 
																												University Computer. 
																												
																												Although the above example is quite adequate to illustrate the mathematical prin- 
																												ciples involved it may be thought that the chemical reaction system is somewhat 
																												artificial. The following example is perhaps less so. The same ”special units” are 
																												used. The reactions assumed are 
																												
																												
																												51 
																												
																												
																												10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																												
																												
																												A- at the rate 10-3A, A = 102 
																												X+Y¥Y = C at the rate 10°- XY 
																												C + X+Y_ atthe rate 10°-C 
																												C > D at the rate 62.5-C 
																												B+C 7 at the rate 0.125. BC, B = 10° 
																												W — Y4C - instantly 
																												Yno E at the rate 0.0625 - Y 
																												Y4+V > V' instantly 
																												V'’ + E+Y atthe rate 62.5-Y, V’=107-°- 86 
																												
																												
																												The effect of the reactions X+Y — C is that C = 10-3. XY. The reaction 
																												C' — D destroys C, and therefore in effect both X and Y, at the rate 7 -XY. The 
																												reaction A — X forms X at the constant rate 1, and the pair Y+V > V’ > E+V 
																												destroys Y at the constant rate 4-8. The pair B+ C —+ W - Y+4+C forms Y 
																												
																												
																												16 
																												at the rate 2- XY, and Y > E destroys it at the rate 4+ -Y. The total effect 
																												
																												
																												therefore is that X is produced at the rate f(X,Y) = %- (16 — XY), and Y at the 
																												rate g(X,Y) = 4 -(XY—Y-—£). However, g(X,Y) = 0 if Y < 0. The diffusion 
																												constants will be supposed to be Z = ‘, N= ce The homogeneity condition 
																												gives hk = 16, k = 16—. It will be seen from conditions in Equation 9.4 that case 
																												section 8.4 applies if and only if 4 + k < 2.75, ie. if k lies between 1.725 and 9.257. 
																												The condition in Equation 9.5 shows that there will be instability if in addition 
																												8 + & Sao on ie. if k does not lie between 4.98 and 12.8. It will also be found 
																												that the wavelength corresponding to k = 4.98 is 4.86 cell diameters. 
																												
																												In the case of a ring of six cells with 6 = 12 there is a stable equilibrium, as shown 
																												in Table 10.2. 
																												
																												
																												cell 0 1 2 3 4 5 
																												X 7.5 35 2.5 2.5 3.5 7.5 
																												Y 0 8 8 8 8 0 
																												
																												
																												Table 10.2.: Numerical example with six cells resulting in a stable (dynamic) 
																												equilibrium 
																												
																												
																												52 
																												
																												
																												10. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 
																												
																												
																												It should be recognized that these equilibria are only dynamic equilibria. The 
																												molecules which together make up the chemical waves are continually changing, 
																												though their concentrations in any particular cell are only undergoing small statis- 
																												tical fluctuations. Moreover, in order to maintain the wave pattern, a continual 
																												supply of free energy is required. It is clear that this must be so since there is a 
																												continual degradation of energy through diffusion. This energy is supplied through 
																												the ” fuel substances” (A, B in the last example), which are degraded into ” waste 
																												products” (D, E). 
																												
																												
																												53 
																												
																												
																												11. RESTATEMENT AND BIOLOGICAL 
																												INTERPRETATION OF THE 
																												RESULTS 
																												
																												
																												Certain readers may have preferred to omit the detailed mathematical treatment 
																												of chapter 6, chapter 7, chapter 8, chapter 9, and chapter 10. For their benefit the 
																												assumptions and results will be briefly summarized, with some change of emphasis. 
																												The system considered was either a ring of cells each in contact with its neighbours, 
																												or a continuous ring of tissue. The effects are extremely similar in the two cases. 
																												For the purposes of this summary it is not necessary to distinguish between them. 
																												A system with two or three morphogens only was considered, but the results apply 
																												quite generally. The system was supposed to be initially in a stable homogeneous 
																												condition, but disturbed slightly from this state by some influences unspecified, 
																												such as BROWNian movement or the effects of neighbouring structures or slight 
																												irregularities of form. It was supposed also that slow changes are taking place in 
																												the reaction rates (or, possibly, the diffusibilities) of the two or three morphogens 
																												under consideration. These might, for instance, be due to changes of concentration 
																												of other morphogens acting in the role of catalyst or of fuel supply, or to a concur- 
																												rent growth of the cells, or a change of temperature. Such changes are supposed 
																												ultimately to bring the system out of the stable state. The phenomena when the 
																												system is just unstable were the particular subject of the inquiry. In order to make 
																												the problem mathematically tractable it was necessary to assume that the system 
																												never deviated very far from the original homogeneous condition. This assumption 
																												was called the ” linearity assumption” because it permitted the replacement of the 
																												general reaction rate functions by linear ones. This linearity assumption is a serious 
																												one. Its justification lies in the fact that the patterns produced in the early stages 
																												when it is valid may be expected to have strong qualitative similarity to those 
																												prevailing in the later stages when it is not. Other, less important, assumptions 
																												were also made at the beginning of the mathematical theory, but the detailed effects 
																												of these were mostly considered in chapter 9, and were qualitatively unimportant. 
																												The conclusions reached were as follows. After the lapse of a certain period of time 
																												from the beginning of instability, a pattern of morphogen concentrations appears 
																												which can best be described in terms of ” waves”. There are six types of possibilities 
																												which may arise. 
																												
																												
																												11. RESTATEMENT AND ...INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS 
																												
																												
																												a) 
																												
																												
																												The equilibrium concentrations and reaction rates may become such that 
																												there would be instability for an isolated cell with the same content as any 
																												one of the cells of the ring. If that cell drifts away from the equilibrium 
																												position, like an upright stick falling over, then, in the ring, each cell may 
																												be expected to do likewise. In neighbouring cells the drift may be expected 
																												to be in the same direction, but in distant cells, e.g. at opposite ends of a 
																												diameter there is no reason to expect this to be so. 
																												
																												This is the least interesting of the cases. It is possible, however, that it 
																												might account for ”dappled” colour patterns, and an example of a pattern in 
																												two dimensions produced by this type of process is shown in Figure 9.1 for 
																												comparison with ”dappling”. If dappled patterns are to be explained in this 
																												way they must be laid down in a latent form when the foetus is only a few 
																												inches long. Later the distances would be greater than the morphogens could 
																												travel by diffusion. 
																												
																												
																												This case is similar to (a), except that the departure from equilibrium is not 
																												a unidirectional drift, but is oscillatory. As in case (a) there may not be 
																												agreement between the contents of cells at great distances. 
																												
																												There are probably many biological examples of this metabolic oscillation, 
																												but no really satisfactory one is known to the author. 
																												
																												
																												There may be a drift from equilibrium, which is in opposite directions in 
																												contiguous cells. 
																												No biological examples of this are known. 
																												
																												
																												There is a stationary wave pattern on the ring, with no time variation, apart 
																												from a slow increase in amplitude, i.e. the pattern is slowly becoming more 
																												marked. In the case of a ring of continuous tissue the pattern is sinusoidal, i.e. 
																												the concentration of one of the morphogens plotted against position on the 
																												ring is a sine curve. The peaks of the waves will be uniformly spaced round the 
																												ring. The number of such peaks can be obtained approximately by dividing 
																												the so-called ” chemical wavelength” of the system into the circumference of 
																												the ring. The chemical wavelength is given for the case of two morphogens 
																												by Equation 9.3. This formula for the number of peaks of course does not 
																												give a whole number, but the actual number of peaks will always be one of 
																												the two whole numbers nearest to it, and will usually be the nearest. The 
																												degree of instability is also shown in Equation 9.3. 
																												
																												The mathematical conditions under which this case applies are given in 
																												Equation 9.4, Equation 9.5. 
																												
																												Biological examples of this case are discussed at some length below. 
																												
																												
																												For a two-morphogen system only the alternatives (a) to (d) are possible, but 
																												with three or more morphogens it is possible to have travelling waves. With a 
																												ring there would be two sets of waves, one travelling clockwise and the other 
																												
																												
																												59 
																												
																												
																												11. RESTATEMENT AND ... INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS 
																												
																												
																												anticlockwise. There is a natural chemical wavelength and wave frequency in 
																												this case as well as a wavelength; no attempt was made to develop formulee 
																												for these. 
																													
																													In looking for biological examples of this there is no need to consider only 
																													rings. The waves could arise in a tissue of any anatomical form. It is 
																													important to know what wavelengths, velocities and frequencies would be 
																													consistent with the theory. These quantities are determined by the rates at 
																													which the reactions occur (more accurately by the ”marginal reaction rates”, 
																																			   which have the dimensions of the reciprocal of a time), and the diffusibilities 
																																			   of the morphogens. The possible range of values of the reaction rates is 
																																			   so immensely wide that they do not even give an indication of orders of 
																																			   magnitude. The diffusibilities are more helpful. If one were to assume that 
																																			   all the dimensionless parameters in a system of travelling waves were the 
																																			   same as in the example given in chapter 8, one could say that the product 
																																			   of the velocity and wavelength of the waves was 37 times the diffusibility of 
																																			   the most diffusible morphogen. But this assumption is certainly false, and 
																																			   it is by no means obvious what is the true range of possible values for the 
																																			   numerical constant (here 37). The movements of the tail of a spermatozoon 
																																			   suggest themselves as an example of these travelling waves. That the waves 
																																			   are within one cell is no real difficulty. However, the speed of propagation 
																																			   seems to be somewhat greater than can be accounted for except with a rather 
																																			   large numerical constant. 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   f) Metabolic oscillation with neighbouring cells in opposite phases. 
																																			   No biological examples of this are known to the author. 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   It is difficult also to find cases to which case (d) applies directly, but this is 
																																			   simply because isolated rings of tissue are very rare. On the other hand, systems 
																																			   that have the same kind of symmetry as a ring are extremely common, and it is 
																																			   to be expected that under appropriate chemical conditions, stationary waves may 
																																			   develop on these bodies, and that their circular symmetry will be replaced by a 
																																			   polygonal symmetry. Thus, for instance, a plant shoot! may at one time have 
																																			   circular symmetry, i.e. appear essentially the same when rotated through any angle 
																																			   about a certain axis; this shoot may later develop a whorl! of leaves, and then it will 
																																			   only suffer rotation through the angle which separates the leaves, or any multiple 
																																			   of it. This same example demonstrates the complexity of the situation when more 
																																			   than one dimension is involved. The leaves on the shoots may not appear in whorls, 
																																			   but be imbricated. This possibility is also capable of mathematical analysis, and 
																																			   will be considered in detail in a later paper. The cases which appear to the writer 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   'In botany, a plant shoot consists of any plant stem together with its appendages like, leaves 
																																			   and lateral buds, flowering stems, and flower buds. The new growth from seed germination that 
																																			   grows upward is a shoot where leaves will develop. In the spring, perennial plant shoots are the 
																																			   new growth that grows from the ground in herbaceous plants or the new stem or flower growth 
																																			   that grows on woody plants. 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   56 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   11. RESTATEMENT AND ... INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   to come closest biologically to the ”isolated ring of cells” are the tentacles of (e.g.) 
																																			   Hydra, Figure 11.2, and the whorls of leaves of certain plants such as Woodruff 
																																			   (Asperula odorata), see Figure 11.1. 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   Figure 11.2.: Hydra, a genus of 
																																			   Figure 11.1.: The flowering small freshwater organisms 
																																			   perennial plant Galium odor- 
																																			   atum, the sweet woodruff or 
																																			   sweetscented bedstraw 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   Hydra is something like a sea-anemone but lives in fresh water and has from 
																																			   about five to ten tentacles. A part of a Hydra cut off from the rest will rearrange 
																																			   itself so as to form a complete new organism. At one stage of this proceeding the 
																																			   organism has reached the form of a tube open at the head end and closed at the 
																																			   other end. The external diameter is somewhat greater at the head end than over 
																																			   the rest of the tube. The whole still has circular symmetry. At a somewhat later 
																																			   stage the symmetry has gone to the extent that an appropriate stain will bring 
																																			   out a number of patches on the widened head end. These patches arise at the 
																																			   points where the tentacles are subsequently to appear ([1], p. 101 and figure 30). 
																																			   According to morphogen theory it is natural to suppose that reactions, similar to 
																																			   those which were considered in connection with the ring of tissue, take place in 
																																			   the widened head end, leading to a similar breakdown of symmetry. The situation 
																																			   is more complicated than the case of the thin isolated ring, for the portion of the 
																																			   Hydra concerned is neither isolated nor very thin. It is not unreasonable to suppose 
																																			   that this head region is the only one in which the chemical conditions are such as 
																																			   to give instability. But substances produced in this region are still free to diffuse 
																																			   through the surrounding region of lesser activity. There is no great difficulty in 
																																			   extending the mathematics to cover this point in particular cases. But if the active 
																																			   region is too wide the system no longer approximates the behaviour of a thin ring 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   57 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   11. RESTATEMENT AND ... INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS 
																																			   
																																			   
																																			   and one can no longer expect the tentacles to form a single whorl. This also cannot 
																																			   be considered in detail in the present paper. 
																																			   
																																			   In the case of woodruff the leaves appear in whorls on the stem, the number of 
																																			   leaves in a whorl varying considerably, sometimes being as few as five or as many 
																																			   as nine. The numbers in consecutive whorls on the same stem are often equal, but 
																																			   by no means invariably. It is to be presumed that the whorls originate in rings 
																																			   of active tissue in the meristematic area, and that the rings arise at sufficiently 
																																			   great distance to have little influence on one another. The number of leaves in 
																																			   the whorl will presumably be obtainable by the rule given above, viz. by dividing 
																																			   the chemical wavelength into the circumference, though both these quantities will 
																																			   have to be given some new interpretation more appropriate to woodruff than to 
																																			   the ring. Another important example of a structure with polygonal symmetry is 
																																			   provided by young root fibres just breaking out from the parent root. Initially 
																																			   these are almost homogeneous in cross-section, but eventually a ring of fairly 
																																			   evenly spaced spots appear, and these later develop into vascular strands. In this 
																																			   case again the full explanation must be in terms of a two-dimensional or even a 
																																			   three-dimensional problem, although the analysis for the ring is still illuminating. 
																																			   When the cross-section is very large the strands may be in more than one ring, or 
																																			   more or less randomly or hexagonally arranged. The two-dimensional theory (not 
																																			   expounded here) also goes a long way to explain this. 
																																			   
																																			   Flowers might appear superficially to provide the most obvious examples of polygo- 
																																			   nal symmetry, and it is probable that there are many species for which this ” waves 
																																			   round a ring” theory is essentially correct. But it is certain that it does not apply 
																																			   for all species. If it did it would follow that, taking flowers as a whole, i.e. mixing 
																																				   up all species, there would be no very markedly preferred petal (or corolla, segment, 
																																																					stamen, etc.) numbers, see Figure 11.3. For when all species are taken into account 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					Figure 11.3.: Flower with five petals of Plumeria, also known as frangipani 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					58 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					11. RESTATEMENT AND ...INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					one must expect that the diameters of the rings concerned will take on nearly 
																																																					all values within a considerable range, and that neighbouring diameters will be 
																																																					almost equally common. There may also be some variation in chemical wavelength. 
																																																					Neighbouring values of the ratio circumferences to wavelength should therefore be 
																																																					more or less equally frequent, and this must mean that neighbouring petal numbers 
																																																					will have much the same frequency. But this is not borne out by the facts. The 
																																																					number five is extremely common, and the number seven rather rare. Such facts 
																																																					are, in the author’s opinion, capable of explanation on the basis of morphogen 
																																																					theory, and are closely connected with the theory of phyllotaxis. They cannot be 
																																																					considered in detail here. 
																																																					
																																																					The case of a filament of tissue calls for some comment. The equilibrium patterns 
																																																					on such a filament will be the same as on a ring, which has been cut at a point 
																																																					where the concentrations of the morphogens are a maximum or a minimum. This 
																																																					could account for the segmentation of such filaments. It should be noticed, however, 
																																																					that the theory will not apply unmodified for filaments immersed in water. 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					59 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHERES. 
																																																					GASTRULATION 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					The treatment of homogeneity breakdown on the surface of a sphere is not much 
																																																					more difficult than in the case of the ring. The theory of spherical harmonics, 
																																																					on which it is based, is not, however, known to many that are not mathematical 
																																																					specialists. Although the essential properties of spherical harmonics that are used 
																																																					are stated below, many readers will prefer to proceed directly to the last paragraph 
																																																					of this section. 
																																																					
																																																					The anatomical structure concerned in this problem is a hollow sphere of continuous 
																																																					tissue such as a blastula. It is supposed sufficiently thin that one can treat it as a 
																																																					” spherical shell”. This latter assumption is merely for the purpose of mathematical 
																																																					simplification; the results are almost exactly similar if it is omitted. As in chapter 7 
																																																					there are to be two morphogens, and a, b, c, d, A, H, h, k are also to have the 
																																																					same meaning as they did there. The operator V? will be used here to mean the 
																																																					superficial part of the LAPLACE operator, i.e. V? V will be an abbreviation of 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					Oy. 4 a Aa 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					p? O¢?  p? sin? 6 00 Ne 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					where @ and @¢ are spherical polar co-ordinates on the surface of the sphere and p 
																																																					is its radius. The equations corresponding to Equation 7.1 may then be written as 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					on =a-(X—h) +b-(Y-k) + R-V?2X 
																																																					t (12.1) 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					or =e. (X—h) +d. (Yk) +R VW°Y 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					It is well known (e.g. [2], chapter 8.) that any function on the surface of the sphere, 
																																																					or at least any that is likely to arise in a physical problem, can be ”expanded in 
																																																					spherical surface harmonics”. This means that it can be expressed in the form 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					=) AP" (cos 0) - anh 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					n=0 \m=—-n 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					The expression in the square bracket is described as a ”surface harmonic of degree 
																																																					n”. Its nearest analogue in the ring theory is a FOURIER component. The essential 
																																																					property of a spherical harmonic of degree n is that when the operator V? is applied 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHERES. GASTRULATION 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					to it, the effect is the same as multiplication by eee In view of this fact it is 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					evident that a solution of Equation 12.1 is 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					xh+S> S> es elt 4 BM. att Pico se 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					akan (12.2) 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					Yk+ Cm. eldet + Dm. eit) P™(cos 9) - el? , 
																																																					ae 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					n=0 m=—n 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					where gq, and qj, are the two roots of 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					Gi Gl 
																																																					(1-a+ Mn-(n+1))-(a—a+ Bn (n+) = be (12.3) 
																																																					and 
																																																					AB (a —a Pen 1)) = 8c 
																																																					ie (12.4) 
																																																					i Ca Xn -(n )) = Dp. 
																																																					p 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					This is the most general solution, since the coefficients A’, and B!” can be chosen 
																																																					to give any required values of X, Y when t = 0, except when Equation 12.3 has two 
																																																					equal roots, in which case a treatment is required which is similar to that applied 
																																																					in similar circumstances in chapter 7. The analogy with chapter 7 throughout will 
																																																					indeed be obvious, though the summation with respect to m does not appear there. 
																																																					The meaning of this summation is that there are a number of different patterns 
																																																					with the same wavelength, which can be superposed with various amplitude factors. 
																																																					Then supposing that, as in chapter 8, one particular wavelength predominates, 
																																																					Equation 12.2 reduces to 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					X—h = etro! . % Am P™ (cos 8) - ei™ 
																																																					m=—np (12.5) 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					/ 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					= ap eo bs (X_ 
																																																					b- (Yk) = (tn A ( +1) (X—h). 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					In other words, the concentrations of the two morphogens are proportional, and 
																																																					both of them are surface harmonics of the same degree no, viz. that which makes 
																																																					the greater of the roots qno, gj, have the greatest value. 
																																																					
																																																					It is probable that the forms of various nearly spherical structures, such as radio- 
																																																					larian skeletons, are closely related to these spherical harmonic patterns. The most 
																																																					important application of the theory seems, however, to be to the gastrulation of 
																																																					a blastula, Figure 12.1. Suppose that the chemical data, including the chemical 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					61 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHERES. GASTRULATION 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					wavelength, remain constant as the radius of the blastula increases. 'To be quite 
																																																					specific suppose that 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					R= 2 
																																																					Qe= 1 
																																																					a=-4 
																																																					
																																																					=-8 
																																																					e=4 
																																																					=F 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					With these values the system is quite stable so long as the radius is less than about 
																																																					2. Near this point, however, the harmonics of degree 1 begin to develop and a 
																																																					pattern of form according to Equation 12.5 with nop = 1 makes its appearance. 
																																																					Making use of the facts that 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					P?(cos 0) = cos 
																																																					Pi (cos 0) = P, ‘(cos @) = sin@ 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					it is seen that X —h is of the form 
																																																					X—-h=A-cos0+B-sinOcos@¢+C-sinOsing, (12.6) 
																																																					
																																																					which may also be interpreted as 
																																																					X—h = A’- cos 6! (12.7) 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					where @’ is the angle which the radius 6, 6 makes with the fixed direction having 
																																																					direction cosines proportional to B, C, A and A’ = VA?+ B24 C®. 
																																																					
																																																					
																																																					The outcome of the analysis therefore is quite simply this. Under certain not very 
																																																					restrictive conditions (which include a requirement that the sphere be relatively 
																																																					small but increasing in size) the pattern of the breakdown of homogeneity is axially 
																																																					symmetrical, not about the original axis of spherical polar co-ordinates, but about 
																																																					some new axis determined by the disturbing influences. The concentrations of the 
																																																					first morphogen are given by Equation 12.7, where 6’ is measured from this new 
																																																					axis; and Y —k is proportional to X —h. Supposing that the first morphogen is, 
																or encourages the production of a growth hormone, one must expect the blastula 
																to grow in an axially symmetric manner, but at a greater rate at one end of the 
																axis than at the other. This might under many circumstances lead to gastrulation, 
																though the effects of such growth are not very easily determinable. They depend on 
																the elastic properties of the tissue as well as on the growth rate at each point. This 
																growth will certainly lead to a solid of revolution with a marked difference between 
																the two poles, unless, in addition to the chemical instability, there is a mechanical 
																
																
																62 
																
																
																12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHERES. GASTRULATION 
																
																
																Figure 12.1.: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) observations of early develop- 
																mental stages. a. Blastula 14.5h after insemination. Similar sized blastomeres are 
																evident arrayed underneath the egg envelope. b . An inner view of the blastula 
																of the same stage as in a. The blastula consists of tall columnar cells about 
																35 to 45 ym in height and tapering from 5 to 15m in width arrayed around a 
																narrow blastocoel of about 201m. c . Early gastrula 22h after fertilization . The 
																ectodermal cells have shortened and the vegetal plate cells have elongated. Arrow 
																indicates egg envelope. d. Gastrula 38h after insemination. The invaginated 
																archenteron has expanded to fill the blastocoel. Arrow: chorion, double arrow: 
																fertilization envelope. e and f. Young tornaria just after the hatching at 44h after 
																insemination. Ciliary bands (arrowheads) and future telotroch (arrow) are already 
																differentiated. (Scale bars: 10 pm), taken from [10] 
																
																
																63 
																
																
																12. CHEMICAL WAVES ON SPHERES. GASTRULATION 
																
																
																instability causing the breakdown of axial symmetry. The direction of the axis of 
																gastrulation will be quite random according to this theory. It may be that it is 
																found experimentally that the axis is normally in some definite direction such as 
																that of the animal pole. This is not essentially contradictory to the theory, for 
																any small asymmetry of the zygote may be sufficient to provide the ” disturbance” 
																which determines the axis. 
																
																
																64 
																
																
																13. NON-LINEAR THEORY. USE OF 
																DIGITAL COMPUTERS 
																
																
																The ” wave” theory which has been developed here depends essentially on the 
																assumption that the reaction rates are linear functions of the concentrations, an 
																assumption which is justifiable in the case of a system just beginning to leave a 
																homogeneous condition. Such systems certainly have a special interest as giving 
																the first appearance of a pattern, but they are the exception rather than the rule. 
																Most of an organism, most of the time, is developing from one pattern into another, 
																rather than from homogeneity into a pattern. One would like to be able to follow 
																this more general process mathematically also. The difficulties are, however, such 
																that one cannot hope to have any very embracing theory of such processes, beyond 
																the statement of the equations. It might be possible, however, to treat a few 
																particular cases in detail with the aid of a digital computer. This method has 
																the advantage that it is not so necessary to make simplifying assumptions as it 
																is when doing a more theoretical type of analysis. It might even be possible to 
																take the mechanical aspects of the problem into account as well as the chemical, 
																when applying this type of method. The essential disadvantage of the method is 
																that one only gets results for particular cases. But this disadvantage is probably 
																of comparatively little importance. Even with the ring problem, considered in 
																this paper, for which a reasonably complete mathematical analysis was possible, 
																the computational treatment of a particular case was most illuminating. The 
																morphogen theory of phyllotaxis, to be described, as already mentioned, in a later 
																paper, will be covered by this computational method. Non-linear equations will be 
																used. 
																
																It must be admitted that the biological examples which it has been possible to 
																give in the present paper are very limited. This can be ascribed quite simply to 
																the fact that biological phenomena are usually very complicated. Taking this in 
																combination with the relatively elementary mathematics used in this paper one 
																could hardly expect to find that many observed biological phenomena would be 
																covered. It is thought, however, that the imaginary biological systems which have 
																been treated, and the principles which have been discussed, should be of some help 
																in interpreting real biological forms. 
																
																
																A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY 
																OF MACROMOLECULES 
																
																
																Reptation theory, in principle, describes quantitatively time- and space-averaged 
																relaxation modes of single chains occurring at different time- and length scales. 
																Within single chains there are understood natural polymers or macromolecules 
																such as DNA, and actin filaments as well as synthetic polymers. Reptation means, 
																that macromolecules perform wormlike displacements inside a strongly cross-linked 
																polymeric solution with obstacles. Finally, the theory describes the effect of polymer 
																chain entanglements based on a relationship between molecular mass .W and chain 
																relaxation time 7,. The reptation model predicts that the relaxation time 7, and 
																the viscosity 4 should scale with the molecular weight .@ to the power 3. The 
																power 3.4 is observed experimentally. Furthermore due to the reptation motion of 
																the single chains or macromolecules respectively the coefficient of self-diffusion Dot 
																depend on the length of macromolecule as « a. This is shown in what follows. 
																
																
																A.1. A Model for Reptation 
																
																
																We follow the article by de Gennes, [4]: 
																
																
																We consider a freely jointed chain consisting of ”N” independent ”monomers” or 
																position vectors r;, 27 = 1,2,---,N, respectively, i.e. ”N” is the total number of 
																chain monomers per one macromolecule. This means that the orientation and length 
																of each bond is independent of all others. The positions of successive monomers are 
																labeled r1,1r2,--- ,n,--- ,tn- The vector intervals or N bond vectors respectively 
																with n =0,1,2,---,N 
																
																
																O 
																A= ta =~ (A.1a) 
																and 
																Or 
																
																
																Am =Llm4i—lm > Ain (A.1b) 
																
																
																A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 
																
																
																stored length b 
																
																
																(a) 
																
																
																6 a 
																
																
																Figure A.1.: A ”defect” moves from A towards C along the chain. When it crosses 
																monomer B, this monomer is displaced by an amount b. 
																
																
																are assumed, as stated before, statistically independent:! 
																(an(t) bd Am (t)) a Oni 3 a” ; (A.2) 
																
																
																where 6 is the DirAc-delta function and a is the statistical segment or KUHN 
																length which is proportional to the end-to-end vector, P = ry — rp = a Pe 
																of the chain molecule. That implies that the real chain is replaced with a KUHN 
																chain that consists of N statistical segments of length a. The actual KUHN chain 
																has therefore a contour length N - a. 
																We assume that the length of the chain is very large when compared to the distance 
																between neighboring links in the fixed network: then the possible chain motions 
																are strongly restricted. We postulate that the only allowed motions correspond to 
																the migration of certain ” defects” along the chain. A qualitative picture for such a 
																defect is shown on Figure A.1. The curvilinear interval between two monomers (n) 
																and (m) would be equal to (n — m) - a in the absence of defects. But if we have v 
																defects in this interval, each of them storing an amount b of length, the curvilinear 
																interval becomes 
																
																Sn — Sm =(n—m)-a—vb. (A.3) 
																
																
																For simplicity we take all defects with the same ” stored length” b. (A distribution of 
																b values can easily be included, but leads to no interesting change in the-final results). 
																The most important consequence of Equation A.3 is that there is a conservation 
																law on defect number: v changes only when a defect crosses one of the end points 
																(n or m) of the interval. This conservation law, plus an assumption of short-range 
																forces (no backflow effects of the Zimm type), leads to a one-dimensional diffusion 
																	
																	
																	'The ”e” sign means vector dot product which is an algebraic operation that takes to coordinate 
																	vectors and returns a single number, i.e. a scalar (a, i.e. the KUHN length) which has a value 
																	but no direction in space. 
																	
																	
																	67 
																	
																	
																	A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 
																	
																	
																	equation for the gas of defects along the chain. To write down this equation, 
																let us introduce the number p of defects per unit length of the extended chain. 
																p= Toma im the example of Equation A.3). We shall constantly assume that 
																p is small, i.e., that we have a dilute gas of defects. Let us also define a defect 
																current Y, (= number of defects passing through point n per unit time). Then 
																the conservation law is 
																
																
																Opie,.< ls SO, 
																 pee =0, A.4 
																 Ot a On : ae 
																 and Y,, has the explicit form 
																 1 Op | p 
																 =D-4---—+——. ; A. 
																 
																 
																 ® is the diffusion coefficient of the defects along the chain: It is a microscopic 
																 constant, characteristic of local jump processes (BROWNian motion), and is inde- 
																 pendent of the molecular mass .@ (for large .@, i.e. for large chained molecules). 
																 The term in brackets in Equation A.5 represents the drift of defects due to external 
																 forces f, applied on the monomers. Y, is the force per defect; to relate y, to fp, 
																	 we write down the work performed when one defect moves by an amount (a-6n) 
																	 along the chain: this means that 6n monomers are displaced, each of them by an 
																	 amount b, where b is a vector of magnitude b, tangential to the chain. Thus 
																	 
																	 
																	 dn-f, eb=a-dn- Qn, 
																 
																 
																 1 
																 (n= —:bef,. (A.6) 
																 
																 a 
																 Equation A.4 and Equation A.5 for the gas of defects must be supplemented by 
																 boundary conditions at both ends of the chain n = 0 and n = N. We assume that, 
				  at the ends, the density p relaxes very rapidly towards a constant equilibrium value 
				  P; 
				  
				  Po = PN = P- 
				  
				  In the absence of external forces, the general solution of the diffusion Equation A.4 
				  and Equation A.5 then takes the form 
				  
				  
				  N 
				  fn - P= > e+ sin (“*) em, (A.7) 
				  
				  
				  where r is a positive integer, labeling the various relaxation modes, c, is a constant, 
				  and the relaxation times 7, are given by 
				  
				  
				  (A.8) 
				  
				  
				  68 
				  
				  
				  A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 
				  
				  
				  The longest among these relaxation times is 
				  
				  
				  (Na)? 
				  1 D 
				  
				  
				  Ta = Tra = (A.9) 
				  and it is proportional to the square of the molecular mass, as the molecular mass 
				  M is directly proportional to the number N of monomers which constitute one 
				  single chain or the macromolecule repsectively. We may say that Ty is the time for 
				  equilibration of the gas of defects. 
				  
				  When the defects move, the chain progresses. The velocity of the n-th monomer is 
				  related to the defect current Y, by 
				  
				  
				  ay; 
				  
				  ag TT b* Pra: (A.10) 
				  Equation A.10 must also be supplemented by boundary conditions. For instance, 
				  when a defect leaves the chain at the extremity (VV), a new terminal arc (of length 
				  b) is set up and may take various orientations: in zoological terms, i.e. to speak in 
				  the words of reptation, the head of the snake must decide which gate it will choose 
				  in the cross-linked network. We assume that this choice is at random, i.e., that the 
				  last vector b is completely uncorrelated to the preceding ones. 
				  The reptation Equation A.4 , Equation A.6, and Equation A.10 are significantly 
				  more complicated than the same equations for a free chain. However, as we shall see 
				  in the following section, it is possible to extract from them some definite predictions 
				  on the stochastic behavior. 
				  
				  
				  A.2. Elementary Calculation of the Over-All Mobility 
				  
				  
				  Let us assume for the moment that the time 7}. for complete renewal of the chain 
				  conformation is much larger than the equilibration time of the defects Ty. When it 
				  holds — what can be shown —, we can derive the chain mobility defined as 
				  
				  
				  v 
				  Die r (A.11) 
				  by a very simple argument. v is the velocity of the chain when it is pulled by a 
				  force f,, . 
					  Consider the chain P in reptation under a constant (weak) force F, applied along a 
					  certain direction (z). The force per monomer is f, = F/N with N being the total 
					  number of monomers. The force on one defect is, according to Equation A.6 
					  
					  
					  _beF 
					  
					  
					  7 (A.12) 
					  
					  
					  Pn 
					  
					  
					  69 
					  
					  
					  A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 
					  
					  
					  The vectors b are time dependent, but they change only on the scale T).. On the 
					  other hand, the gas of defects reaches a steady state under external forces in a 
					  much shorter time Ty. Thus, we can treat the y,’s as constants, and write down 
					  the response of the gas of defects as a steady state conduction current Ba ; 
					  
					  
					  “ N 
					  £7 EE, 
					  ea ‘ dnipn , (A.13) 
					  where [4 
					  _ dD 
					  ce Ts 
					  (or 
					  
					  
					  is the defect mobility according to the EINSTEIN relation of BROWNian motion, 
		[5]. From Equation A.12 we get 
		
		
		= N 
		Bae | F edi (A.15) 
		0 
		
		
		where dl is the line element of the chain. The integral 
		
		
		[ dl=P (A.16) 
		
		
		is the end-to-end vector, and we have for the average defect current 
		
		
		— pubE 
		
		
		The center of gravity g of the chain moves with a velocity 
		
		
		dg. 1 [ow 
		ae Nee 
		
		
		We can transform r, by Equation A.10, obtaining 
		
		
		pe ik ee 
		ae i : bdn = 4 B (A.18) 
		
		
		70 
		
		
		A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 
		
		
		and insert Equation A.17 for the current Y to give 
		
		
		. ppb b 
		
		—- . P. . . P 
		I= (Na? * Na 
		
		__ pub?F -(P.-P) 
		
		7 (Na)? 
		
		
		Averaging over the values of P we are left with one non-vanishing velocity component 
		in z-direction: 
		Jz = tot * i, 
	  
	  
	  where the overall mobility pot is explicitly given by 
	  
	  
	  neon 
	  
	  
	  = ner (A.19) 
	  
	  
	  and where we have used the relation that the average end-to-end distance or 
	  end-to-end vector respectively 
	  
	  
	  Pxa 
	  SP oa 
	  
	  
	  and because we have a KUHN chain with N segments it follows that 
	  (Py oe Na, 
	   
	   
	   Equation A.19 may also be written in terms of the self-diffusion coefficient Aor 
	   according to EINSTEINs relation: 
	   
	   
	   Boor. = Kal Mor - (A.20) 
	   
	   
	   If Equation A.20 is taken instead of Equation A.14 as the overall chain mobility, 
	
	the combination of Equation A.20 and Equation A.19 for 4.4 as the sum off all 
	
	defect mobilities yu gives 
	
	ppb?kpT 
	Nea - 
	
	Both coefficients are seen, as is noted by A. TURING on page 11 to decrease like 
	
	N~? (or @~?, see page 69). 
	
	
	Deo a (A.21) 
	
	
	In general, the self-diffusion coefficient Aor; is the diffusion coefficient of species 
	i, when the chemical potential gradient equals zero. It is linked to the diffusion 
	
	
	val 
	
	
	A. REPTATION. SELF-DIFFUSIBILITY OF MACROMOLECULES 
	
	
	coefficient D; by the equation: 
	
	
	Olnc; 
	‘ Alna; 
	
	
	Q, =D 
	
	
	Here, a; is the activity of the species 7 in the solution and c; is the concentration of 
	i. The self-diffusion coefficient plays an important role in molecular diffusion and 
	BRowWNian motion of which reptation of macromolecules is a part of. 
	
	
	2 
	
	
	B. ILLUSTRATION "EXTREME LONG 
	WAVELENGTH’ AN "EXTREME 
	SHORT WAVELENGTH" 
	
	
	To illustrate the ” case of extreme long wavelength” and of ” extreme short wave- 
	length” one my look at Figure B.1 and Figure B.2 which show two sine functions, 
	one with an argument — 0, and the other one with an argument > 1. For an 
	extreme long wavelength , sin? ( 70) must equal 0, i.e. the term in brackets must 
	be 0 as sin(0) = 0. Therefore (422) = 0 for s9 = 0. For an extreme short wavelength 
	A, sin? (#22) shall be as large as possible, ic. 4? must equal 7/2 or a multiple of 
	= as sin(7/2) = 1. Therefore 42 = % which gives 289 = N or so = 5N. The same 
	applies for s9 = 5+ (N —1). 
	
	
	Figure B.1.: The function sin (42) with A = 207 
	
	
	Figure B.2.: The function sin (9x) with A = = 
	
	
	C. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS OF 
	
	
	Equation 9.18 
	
	
	In the following it will be shown, how the set of coupled differential Equation 9.18 
	can be transformed into another notation. As already mentioned in the footnote 
	
	
	on page 41, Equation 9.18 can be written as 
	
	
	d 
	= = por + Ay? + Bz? 
	d 
	7 = py + Cyz + Day 
	d 
	Gy = Pax + By? + Faz. 
	
	
	Let < ( ) act on these equations which then become 
	
	
	d?x dx 
	qe Pow 2Ay + 2Bz 
	d?y dy dy dz dx dy 
	= + D + DX 
	ae ap age “ode ar dt 
	d?z dz dx dz 
	= 2hyt+F + Fr : 
	diz at Bot pe ode 
	Solving Equation C.2a for He gives 
	dx 1 d?x 
	=—- — 2Ay—2B 
	dt — po ( di? ? 
	
	
	and inserting in Equation C.2b and Equation C.2c gives 
	
	
	(C.1a) 
	(C.1b) 
	
	
	(C.1c) 
	
	
	(C.3) 
	
	
	(C.4b) 
	
	
	dy dy dz... 1 d?z 
	
	ee 1D ! CAN Dy = DAD SO BD. C.4 
	qa — it Cz + Da) + Cye " ( ap y yz) (C.4a) 
	d2z dz 1 dx 
	
	mci F bQhy a ( he—— =2Arye = 2B FS |... 
	
	qe as ( “ar a “ ) 
	
	
	C. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS OF Equation 9.18 
	
	
	Solving Equation C.4b for 1 and inserting in Equation C.4a gives 
	d*y — d’z Cy 
	dt? dt? po + Fa 
	
	
	d*x y Cz 5 
	dt? po \potFa 
	
	
	d 
	a (Pa + Cz + Dx) 
	1 2CE 2ACF 
	a ee CEpo _ ope + 24D) 
	Po \pet Fa pot Fa 
	1 2IBCFz 
	by a( S - 2BD:) (C.5) 
	Po Pop Es 
	
	
	Let af = 2pow and substituting u for eae then Equation C.5 becomes 
	
	
	d?z 2 2 2 
	= Gp | pou — (Fzup — Dy”): 
	CD D 
	t (pr + Oz + - En) Spotb 
	
	
	2C 
	uF 
	
	
	6po 
	
	
	2 
	— gv . (Epou — AF pouz + ADpo) + 2y. (BFuv _ BDz) ; (C.6) 
	
	
	2 
	
	
	Now substituting @ = a and a = a gives 
	
	
	2a da 
	ae (18CDF wy) + ae (6CF*¢°y") 
	+ a? - (54CDF pow) 
	+ a+ (54F popit) + 9CF pod?) — 54D pope) 
		—12ADF po” — 6BDF dy? — 108F po) 
					  =" - (1ZEppb? — 18p9¢ — BFS") . 
					  
					  
					  75 
					  
					  
					  Bibliography 
					  
					  
					  [1] 
					  
					  
					  C. M. Child. Patterns and Problems of Development, University of Chicago 
					  Press, lst Edition, 1941. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/ 
					  28806#page/7/mode/1up. 
					  
					  
					  J. Jeans. The mathematical theory of elasticity and magnetism, Cam- 
					  bridge University Press, 5th Edition, 1927. https://ia904707. 
					  us.archive.org/8/items/in.ernet.dli.2015.126027/2015.126027. 
					  The-Mathematical-Theory-Of-Electricity-And-Magnetism-Ed-5th_ 
					  text.pdf. 
					  
					  
					  H. Davson and J. F. Danielli. The permeability of natural membranes. Cam- 
					  bridge University Press, 1 edition, 1943. 
					  
					  
					  P. G. De Gennes. Reptation of a Polymer Chain in the Presence of Fixed 
					  Obstacles. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 55(2):572-579, 1971. 
					  
					  
					  A. Einstein. Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Warme 
					  geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Flissigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen. 
					  Annalen der Physik, 17:549—-560, 1905. 
					  
					  
					  H. Haken. Synergetics: Introduction and advanced topics. Springer Berlin, 
					  Heidelberg, 1 edition, 2004. Originally published in 2 Volumes as Volume 1 in 
					  the series ” Springer Series in Synergetics” . 
					  
					  
					  A. J. Lotka. Contribution to the theory of periodic reaction. Journal of 
					  Physical Chemistry, 14(3):271-274, 1910. 
					  
					  
					  A. J. Lotka. Zur Theorie der periodischen Reaktionen. Zeitschrift ftir physikali- 
					  sche Chemie, 72(1):508-511, 1910. 
					  
					  
					  L. Michaelis and M. L. Menten. Die Kinetik der Invertinwirkung. Biochemische 
					  Zeitschrift, 49:333-369, 1913. 
					  
					  
					  Y. Nakajima, T. Humphreys, H. Kaneko, and K. Tagawa. Development and 
					  Neural Organization of the Tornaria Larva of the Hawaiian Hemichordate, 
					  Ptychodera flava. Zoological Science, 21(1):69-78, 2004. 
					  
					  
					  C. H. Waddington. Organisers and genes. Cambridge biological studies. 
					  Cambridge University Press, 1 edition, 1940. 
					  
					  
					  
